**The Project Gutenberg Etext of Tom Swift And His Motor-Boat**
#2 in Victor Appleton's Tom Swift Series

We name the Tom Swift files as they are numbered in the books--
i.e. This is #2 in the series so the file name is 02tomxxx.xxx
where the x's are place holders for edition # and file type such
as 02tom10.txt and 02tom10.zip, when we do a .htm, 02tom10h.htm


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Tom Swift And His Motor-Boat
or
The Rivals of Lake Carlopa

by Victor Appleton

August, 2000  [Etext #2273]


**The Project Gutenberg Etext of Tom Swift And His Motor-Boat**
*****This file should be named 02tom10.txt or 02tom10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 02tom11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 02tom10a.txt.


The Etext was prepared for Project Gutenberg by Ronald Benninghoff
And proof read by Erin Hartshorn and George Joseph


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart hart@pobox.com

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





The Etext was prepared for Project Gutenberg by Ronald Benninghoff
and proof read by Erin Hartshorn and George Joseph





TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-BOAT
Or The Rivals of Lake Carlopa

By VICTOR APPLETON


CONTENTS

I ----- A Motor-boat Auction
II ---- Some Lively Bidding
III --- A Timely Warning
IV ---- Tom And Andy Clash
V ----- A Test Of Speed
VI ---- Towing Some Girls
VII --- A Brush With Andy
VIII -- Off On A Trip
IX ---- Mr. Swift Is Alarmed
X ----- A Cry For Help
XI ---- A Quick Run
XII --- Suspicious Characters
XIII -- Tom In Danger
XIV --- The ARROW Disappears
XV ---- A Damaging Statement
XVI --- Still On The Search
XVII -- "There She Is!"
XVIII - The Pursuit
XIX --- A Quiet Cruise
XX ---- News Of A Robbery
XXI --- The Balloon On Fire
XXII -- The Rescue
XXIII - Plans For An Airship
XXIV -- The Mystery Solved
XXV --- Winning A Race




CHAPTER I

A MOTOR-BOAT AUCTION

"Where are you going, Tom?" asked Mr. Barton Swift of his son as
the young man was slowly pushing his motor-cycle out of the yard
toward the country road.  "You look as though you had some object
in view."

"So I have, dad.  I'm going over to Lanton."

"To Lanton?  What for?"

"I want to have a look at that motor-boat."

"Which boat is that, Tom? I don't recall your speaking about a
boat over at Lanton.  What do you want to look at it for?"

"It's the motor-boat those fellows had who tried to get away with
your turbine model invention, dad.  The one they used at the old
General Harkness mansion, in the woods near the lake, and the same
boat that fellow used when he got away from me the day I was
chasing him here."

"Oh, yes, I remember now.  But what is the boat doing over at
Lanton?"

"That's where it belongs.  It's the property of Mr. Bently
Hastings.  The thieves stole it from him, and when they ran away
from the old mansion, the time Mr. Damon and I raided the place,
they left the boat on the lake.  I turned it over to the county
authorities, and they found out it belonged to Mr. Hastings.  He
has it back now, but I understand it's somewhat damaged, and he
wants to get rid of it.  He's going to sell it at auction to-day,
and I thought I'd go over and take a look at it.  You see--"

"Yes, I see, Tom," exclaimed Mr. Swift with a laugh.  "I see what
you're aiming at.  You want a motor-boat, and you're going all
around Robin Hood's barn to get at it."

"No, dad, I only--"

"Oh, I know you, Tom, my lad!" interrupted the inventor, shaking
his finger at his son, who seemed somewhat confused.  "You have a
nice rowing skiff and a sailboat, yet you are hankering for a
motor-boat.  Come now, own up.  Aren't you?"

"Well, dad, a motor-boat certainly would go fine on Lake Carlopa.
There's plenty of room to speed her, and I wonder there aren't
more of them.  I was going to see what Mr. Hastings' boat would
sell for, but I didn't exactly think of buying it' Still--"

"But you wouldn't buy a damaged boat, would you?"

"It isn't much damaged," and in his eagerness the young inventor
(for Tom Swift had taken out several patents) stood his
motor-cycle up against the fence and came closer to his father.
"It's only slightly damaged," he went on. "I can easily fix it.
I looked it all over before I gave it in charge of the
authorities, and it's certainly a fine boat. It's worth nine
hundred dollars--or it was when it was new."

"That's a good deal of money for a boat," and Mr. Swift looked
serious, for though he was well off, he was inclined to be
conservative.

"Oh, I shouldn't think of paying that much.  In fact, dad, I
really had no idea of bidding at the auction.  I only thought I'd
go over and get an idea of what the boat might sell for.  Perhaps
some day--"

Tom paused.  Since his father had begun to question him some new
plans had come into the lad's head.  He looked at his parent and
saw a smile beginning to work around the corners of Mr. Swift's
lips.  There was also a humorous look in the eyes of the older
inventor.  He understood boys fairly well, even if he only had
one, and he knew Tom perfectly.

"Would you really like to make a bid on that boat Tom?" he asked.

"Would I, dad? Well--" The youth did not finish, but his father
knew what he meant.

"I suppose a motor-boat would be a nice thing to have on Lake
Carlopa," went on Mr. Swift musingly.  "You and I could take
frequent trips in it.  It isn't like a motor-cycle, only useful
for one.  What do you suppose the boat will go for, Tom?"

"I hardly know.  Not a high price, I believe, for motor-boats are
so new on our lake that few persons will take a chance on them.
But if Mr. Hastings is getting another, he will not be so
particular about insisting on a high price for the old one.  Then,
too, the fact that it is damaged will help to keep the price down,
though I know I can easily put it in good shape.  I would like to
make a bid, if you think it's all right."

Well, I guess you may, Tom, if you really want it.  You have money
of your own and a motor-boat is not a bad investment.  What do you
think ought to be the limit?"

"Would you consider a hundred and fifty dollars too high?"

Mr. Swift looked at Tom critically.  He was plainly going over
several matters in his mind, and not the least of them was the
pluck his son had shown in getting back some valuable papers and a
model from a gang of thieves.  The lad certainly was entitled to
some reward, and to allow him to get a boat might properly be part
of it.

"I think you could safely go as high as two hundred dollars, Tom,"
said Mr. Swift at length.  "That would be my limit on a damaged
boat for it might be better to pay a little more and get a new
one.  However, use your own judgment, but don't go over two
hundred.  So the thieves who made so much trouble for me stole
that boat from Mr. Hastings, eh?"

"Yes, and they didn't take much care of it either.  They damaged
the engine, but the hull is in good shape.  I'm ever so glad
you'll let me bid on it.  I'll start right off.  The auction is at
ten o'clock and I haven't more than time to get there."

"Now be careful how you bid.  Don't raise your own figures, as
I've sometimes seen women, and men too, do in their excitement.
Somebody may go over your head; and if he does, let them.  If you
get the boat I'll be very glad on your account.  But don't bring
any of Anson Morse's gang back in it with you.  I've seen enough
of them."

"I'll not dad!" cried Tom as he trundled his motor-cycle out of
the gate and into the country road that led to the village of
Shopton, where he lived, and to Lanton, where the auction was to
be held.  The young inventor had not gone far before he turned
back, leaving his machine standing on the side path.

"What's the matter?" asked his father, who had started toward one
of several machine shops on the premises--shops where Mr. Swift
and his son did inventive work.

"Guess I'd better get a blank check and some money," replied Tom
as he entered the house.  "I'll need to pay a deposit if I secure
the boat."

"That's so.  Well, good luck," and with his mind busy on a plan
for a new kind of storage battery, the inventor went on to his
workroom.  Tom got some cash and his checkbook from a small safe
he owned and was soon speeding over the road to Lanton, his motor-
cycle making quite a cloud of dust.  While he is thus hurrying
along to the auction I will tell you something about him.

Tom Swift, son of Barton Swift, lived with his father and a
motherly housekeeper, Mrs. Baggert, in a large house on the
outskirts of the town of Shopton, in New York State.  Mr. Swift
had acquired considerable wealth from his many inventions and
patents, but he did not give up working out his ideas simply
because he had plenty of money.  Tom followed in the footsteps of
his parent and had already taken out several patents.

Shortly before this story opens the youth had become possessed of
a motor-cycle in a peculiar fashion.  As told in the first volume
of this series, entitled "Tom Swift and His Motor-cycle," Tom was
riding to the town of Mansburg on an errand for his father one day
when he was nearly run down by a motorcyclist.  A little later the
same motorcyclist, who was a Mr. Wakefield Damon, of Waterfield,
collided with a tree near Tom's home and was severely cut and
bruised, the machine being broken.  Tom and his father cared for
the injured rider, and Mr. Damon, who was an eccentric individual,
was so disheartened by his attempts to ride the motor-cycle that
he sold it to Tom for fifty dollars, though it had cost much more.

About the same time that Tom bought the motor-cycle a firm of
rascally lawyers, Smeak & Katch by name, had, in conjunction with
several men, made an attempt to get control of an invention of a
turbine motor perfected by Mr. Swift.  The men, who were Ferguson
Appleson, Anson Morse, Wilson Featherton, alias Simpson, and Jake
Burke, alias Happy Harry, who sometimes disguised himself as a
tramp, tried several times to steal the model.

Their anxiety to get it was due to the fact that they had invested
a large sum in a turbine motor invented by another man, but their
motor would not work and they sought to steal Mr. Swift's.  Tom
was sent to Albany on his motor-cycle to deliver the model and
some valuable papers to Mr. Crawford, of the law firm of Reid &
Crawford, of Washington, attorneys for Mr. Swift.  Mr. Crawford
had an errand in Albany and had agreed to meet Tom there with the
model.

But, on the way, Tom was attacked by the gang of unscrupulous men
and the model was stolen.  He was assaulted and carried far away
in an automobile.  In an attempt to capture the gang in a deserted
mansion, in the woods on the shore of Lake Carlopa, Tom was aided
by Mr. Damon, of whom he had purchased the motor-cycle.  The men
escaped, however, and nothing could be done to punish them.

Tom was thinking of the exciting scenes he had passed through
about a month previous as he spun along the road leading to
Lanton.

"I hope I don't meet Happy Harry or any of his gang to-day," mused
the lad as he turned on a little more power to enable his machine
to mount a hill.  "I don't believe they'll attend the auction,
though.  It would be too risky for them."

As Tom swung along at a rapid pace he heard, behind him, the
puffing of an automobile, with the muffler cut out.  He turned and
cast a hasty glance behind.

"I hope that ain't Andy Foger or any of his cronies," he said to
himself.  "He might try to run me down just for spite.  He
generally rushes along with the muffler open so as to attract
attention and make folks think he has a racing car."

It was not Andy, however, as Tom saw a little later, as a man
passed him in a big touring car.  Andy Foger, as my readers will
recollect, was a red-haired, squinty-eyed lad with plenty of money
and not much else.  He and his cronies, including Sam Snedecker,
nearly ran Tom down one day, when the latter was on his bicycle,
as told in the first volume of this series.  Andy had been off on
a tour with his chums during the time when Tom was having such
strenuous adventures and had recently returned.

"If I can only get that boat," mused Tom as he swung back into the
middle of the road after the auto had passed him, "I certainly
will have lots of fun.  I'll make a week's tour of Lake Carlopa
and take dad and Ned Newton with me." Ned was Tom's most
particular chum, but as young Newton was employed in the Shopton
bank, the lad did not have much time for pleasure.  Lake Carlopa
was a large body of water, and it would take a moderately powered
boat several days to make a complete circuit of the shore, so cut
up into bays and inlets was it.

In about an hour Tom was at Lanton, and as he neared the home of
Mr. Hastings, which was on the shore of the lake, he saw quite a
throng going down toward the boathouse.

"There'll be some lively bidding," thought Tom as he got off his
machine and pushed it ahead of him through the drive and down
toward the river.  I hope they don't go above two hundred dollars,
though."

"Get out the way there!" called a sudden voice, and looking back,
Tom saw that an automobile had crept up silently behind him.  In
it were Andy Foger and Sam Snedecker.  "Why don't you get out the
way?" petulantly demanded the red-haired lad.

"Because I don't choose to," replied Tom calmly, knowing that Andy
would never dare to speed up his machine on the slope leading down
to the lake.

"Go ahead, bump him!" the young inventor heard Sam whisper.

"You'd better try it, if you want to get the best trouncing you
ever had!" cried Tom hotly.

"Hu! I s'pose you think you're going to bid on the boat?" sneered
Andy.

"Is there any law against it?" asked Tom.

"Hu! Well, you'll not get it.  I'm going to take that boat,"
retorted the squint-eyed bully.  "Dad gave me the money to get
it."

"All right," answered Tom non-committally.  "Go ahead.  It's a
free country."

He stood his motor-cycle up against a tree and went toward a group
of persons who were surrounding the auctioneer.  The time had
arrived to start the sale.  As Tom edged in closer he brushed
against a man who looked at him sharply.  The lad was just
wondering if he had ever seen the individual before, as there
seemed to be something strangely familiar about him, when the man
turned quickly away, as if afraid of being recognized.

"That's odd," thought Tom, but he had no further time for
speculation, as the auctioneer was mounting on a soapbox and had
begun to address the gathering.


CHAPTER II

SOME LIVELY BIDDING

"Attention, people!" cried the auctioneer.  "Give me your
attention for a few minutes, and we will proceed with the business
in hand.  As you all know, I am about to dispose of a fine motor-
boat, the property of Mr. Bently Hastings.  The reason for
disposing of it at auction is known to most of you, but for the
benefit of those who do not, I will briefly state them.  The boat
was stolen by a gang of thieves and recovered recently through the
efforts of a young man, Thomas Swift, son of Barton Swift, our
fellow-townsman, of Shopton." At that moment the auctioneer, Jacob
Wood, caught sight of Tom in the press, and, looking directly at
the lad, continued:

"I understand that young Mr. Swift is here to-day, and I hope he
intends to bid on this boat.  If he does, the bidding will be
lively, for Tom Swift is a lively young man.  I wish I could say
that some of the men who stole the boat were here to-day."

The auctioneer paused and there were some murmurs from those in
the throng as to why such a wish should be uttered.  Tom felt some
one moving near him, and, looking around, he saw the same man with
whom he had come in contact before.  The person seemed desirous of
getting out on the edge of the crowd, and Tom felt a return of his
vague suspicions.  He looked closely at the fellow, but could
trace no resemblance to any of the men who had so daringly stolen
his father's model.

"The reason I wish they were here to-day," went on Mr. Wood, "is
that the men did some slight damage to the boat, and if they were
here to-day we would make them pay for it.  However, the damage is
slight and can easily be repaired.  I mention that, as Mr.
Hastings desired me to.  Now we will proceed with the bidding, and
I will say that an opportunity will first be given all to examine
the boat.  Perhaps Tom Swift will give us his opinion on the state
it is in as we know he is well qualified to talk about machinery."

All eyes were turned on Tom, for many knew him.

"Humph! I guess I know as much about boats and motors as he does,"
sneered Andy Foger.  'He isn't the only one in this crowd! Why
didn't the auctioneer ask me?"

"Keep quiet," begged Sam Snedecker.  "People are laughing at you,
Andy."

"I don't care if they are," muttered the sandy haired youth.  "Tom
Swift needn't think he's everything."

"If you will come down to the dock," went on the auctioneer, "you
can all see the boat, and I would be glad to have young Mr. Swift
give us the benefit of his advice."

The throng trooped down to the lake, and, blushing somewhat, Tom
told what was the matter with the motor and how it could be fixed.
It was noticed that there was less enthusiasm over the matter than
there had been, for certainly the engine, rusty and out of order
as it was, did not present an attractive sight.  Tom noted that
the man, who had acted so strangely, did not come down to the
dock.

"Guess he can't be much interested in the motor," decided Tom.

"Now then, if it's all the same to you folks, I'll proceed with
the auction here," went on Mr. Wood.  "You can all see the boat
from here.  It is, as you see, a regular family launch and will
carry twelve persons comfortably.  With a canopy fitted to it a
person could cruise all about the lake and stay out over night,
for you could sleep on the seat cushions.  It is twenty-one feet
in length and has a five-and-a-half-foot beam, the design being
what is known as a compromise stern.  The motor is a double-
cylinder two-cycle one, of ten horsepower.  It has a float-feed
carburetor, mechanical oiler, and the ignition system is the jump-
spark--the best for this style of motor.  The boat will make ten
miles an hour, with twelve in, and, of course, more than that with
a lighter load.  A good deal will depend on the way the motor is
managed.

"Now, as you know, Mr. Hastings wishes to dispose of the boat
partly because he does not wish to repair it and partly because he
has a newer and larger one.  The craft, which is named CARLOPA by
the way, cost originally nine hundred dollars.  It could not be
purchased new to day, in many places, for a thousand.  Now what am
I offered in its present condition? Will any one make an offer?
Will you give me five hundred dollars?"

The auctioneer paused and looked critically at the throng.
Several persons smiled.  Tom looked worried.  He had no idea that
the price would start so high.

"Well, perhaps that is a bit stiff," went on Mr. Wood.  "Shall we
say four hundred dollars? Come now, I'm sure it's worth four
hundred.  Who'll start it at four hundred?"

No one would, and the auctioneer descended to three hundred, then
to two and finally, as if impatient, he called out:

"Well, will any one start at fifty dollars?"

Instantly there were several cries of "I will!"

"I thought you would," went on the auctioneer.  "Now we will get
down to work.  I'm offered fifty dollars for this twenty-one foot,
ten horsepower family launch.  Will any one make it sixty?"

"Sixty!" called out Andy Foger in a shrill voice.  Several turned
to look at him.

"I didn't know he was going to bid," thought Tom.  "He may go
above me.  He's got plenty of money, and, while I have too, I'm
not going to pay too much for a damaged boat."

"Sixty I'm bid, sixty--sixty!" cried Mr. Wood in a sing-song
tone, "who'll make it seventy?"

"Sixty-five!" spoke a quiet voice at Tom's elbow, and he turned to
see the mysterious man who had joined the crowd at the edge of the
lake.

"Sixty-five from the gentleman in the white straw hat!" called Mr.
Wood with a smile at his wit, for there were many men wearing
white straw hats, the day being a warm one in June.

"Here, who's bidding above me?" exclaimed Andy, as if it was
against the law.

"I guess you'll find a number going ahead of you, my young
friend," remarked the auctioneer.  "Will you have the goodness not
to interrupt me, except when you want to bid?"

"Well, I offered sixty," said the squint-eyed bully, while his
crony, Sam Snedecker, was vainly, pulling at his sleeve.

"I know you did, and this gentleman went above you.  If you want
to bid more you can do so.  I'm offered sixty-five, sixty-five I'm
offered for this boat.  Will any one make it seventy-five?"

Mr. Wood looked at Tom, and our hero, thinking it was time for
him to make a bid, offered seventy. "Seventy from Tom Swift!"
cried the auctioneer. "There is a lad who knows a motor-boat
from stem to stern, if those are the right words. I don't know
much about boats except what I'm told, but Tom Swift does. Now,
if he bids, you people ought to know that it's all right. I'm
bid seventy--seventy I'm bid. Will any one make it eighty?"

"Eighty!" exclaimed Andy Foger after a whispered conference with
Sam.  "I know as much about boats as Tom Swift.  I'll make it
eighty."

"No side remarks. I'll do most of the talking. You just bid,
young man," remarked Mr. Wood. "I have eighty bid for this
boat--eighty dollars. Why, my friends, I can't understand this.
I ought to have it up to three hundred dollars, at least. But I
thank you all the same. We are coming on. I'm bid eighty--"

"Ninety!" exclaimed the quiet man at Tom's elbow.  He was
continually fingering his upper lip, as though he had a mustache
there, but his face was clean-shaven.  He looked around nervously
as he spoke.

"Ninety!" called out the auctioneer.

"Ninety-five!" returned Tom.  Andy Foger scowled at him, but the
young inventor only smiled.  It was evident that the bully did not
relish being bid against.  He and his crony whispered together
again.

"One hundred!" called Andy, as if no one would dare go above that.

"I'm offered an even hundred," resumed Mr. Wood.  "We are
certainly coming on.  A hundred I am bid, a hundred--a hundred--a
hundred--"

"And five," said the strange man hastily, and he seemed to choke
as he uttered the words.

"Oh, come now; we ought to have at least ten-dollar bids from now
on," suggested Mr. Wood.  "Won't you make it a hundred and ten?"
The auctioneer looked directly at the man, who seemed to shrink
back into the crowd.  He shook his head, cast a sort of despairing
look at the boat and hurried away.

"That's queer," murmured Tom.  "I guess that was his limit, yet if
he wanted the boat badly that wasn't a high price."

"Who's going ahead of me?" demanded Andy in loud tones.

"Keep quiet!" urged Sam.  "We may get it yet."

"Yes, don't make so many remarks," counseled the auctioneer.  "I'm
bid a hundred and five.  Will any one make it a hundred and
twenty-five?"

Tom wondered why the man bad not remained to see if his bid was
accepted, for no one raised it at once, but he hurried off and did
not look back.  Tom took a sudden resolve.

"A hundred and twenty-five!" he called out.

"That's what I like to hear," exclaimed Mr. Wood.  "Now we are
doing business.  A hundred and twenty-five from Tom Swift.  Will
any one offer me fifty?"

Andy and Sam seemed to be having some dispute.

"Let's make him quit right now," suggested Andy in a hoarse
whisper.

"You can't," declared Sam'

"Yes, I can.  I'll go up to my limit right now."

"And some one will go above you---maybe Tom will," was Sam's
retort.

"I don't believe he can afford to," Andy came back with.  "I'm
going to call his bluffs.  I believe he's only bidding to make
others think he wants it.  I don't believe he'll buy it."

Tom heard what was said, but did not reply.  The auctioneer was
calling monotonously: "I'm bid a hundred and twenty-five--twenty-five.
Will any one make it fifty?"

"A hundred and fifty!" sang out Andy, and all eyes were directed
toward him.

"Sixty!" said Tom quietly.

"Here, you--" began the red-haired lad.  You--"

"That will do!" exclaimed the auctioneer sternly.  "I am offered a
hundred and sixty.  Now who will give me an advance? I want to get
the boat up to two hundred, and then the real bidding will begin."

Tom's heart sank.  He hoped it would be some time before a two
hundred dollar offer would be heard.  As for Andy Foger, he was
almost speechless with rage.  He shook off the restraining arm of
Sam, and, worming his way to the front of the throng, exclaimed:

"I'll give a hundred and seventy-five dollars for that boat!"

"Good!" cried the auctioneer.  "That's the way to talk.  I'm
offered a hundred and seventy-five."

"Eighty," said Tom quietly, though his heart was beating fast.

"Well, of all--" began Andy, but Sam Snedecker dragged him back.

"You haven't got any more money," said the bully's crony.
"Better stop now."

"I will not! I'm going home for more," declared Andy.  "I must
have that boat."

"It will be sold when you get back," said Sam.

"Haven't you got any money you can lend me?" inquired the squint-
eyed one, scowling in Tom's direction.

"No, not a bit.  There, some one raised Tom's bid."

At that moment a man in the crowd offered a hundred and eighty-one
dollars.

"Small amounts thankfully received," said Mr. Wood with a laugh.
Then the bidding became lively, a number making one-dollar
advances.

The price got up to one hundred and ninety-five dollars and there
it hung for several minutes, despite the eloquence of Mr. Wood,
who tried by all his persuasive powers to get a substantial
advance.  But every one seemed afraid to bid.  As for the young
inventor, he was in a quandary.  He could only offer five dollars
more, and, if he bid it in a lump, some one might go to two
hundred and five, and he would not get the boat.  He wished he had
secured permission from his father to go higher, yet he knew that
as a fair proposition two hundred dollars was about all the motor-
boat in its present condition was worth, at least to him.  Then he
made a sudden resolve.  He thought he might as well have the
suspense over.

"Two hundred dollars!" he called boldly.

"I'm offered two hundred!" repeated Mr. Wood.  "That is something
like it.  Now who will raise that?"

There was a moment of silence.  Then the auctioneer swung into an
enthusiastic description of the boat.  He begged for an advance,
but none was made, though Tom's heart seemed in his throat, so
afraid was he that he would not get the CARLOPA.

"Two hundred--two hundred!" droned on Mr. Wood. "I am offered
two hundred. Will any of you go any higher?" He paused a moment,
and Tom's heart beat harder than ever. "If not," resumed the
speaker, "I will declare the bidding closed. Are you all done?
Once--twice--three times. Two hundred dollars. Going--going--gone!"
He clapped his hands. "The boat is sold to Thomas Swift for two
hundred dollars. If he'll step up I'll take his money."

There was a laugh as Tom, blushingly, advanced.  He passed Andy
Foger, who had worked his way over near him.

"You got the boat," sneered the bully, "and I s'pose you think you
got ahead of me."

"Keep quiet!" begged Sam.

"I won't!" exclaimed Andy.  "He outbid me just out of spite, and
I'll get even with him.  You see if I don't!"

Tom looked Andy Foger straight in the eyes, but did not answer,
and the red-haired youth turned aside, followed by his crony, and
started toward his automobile.

"I congratulate you on your bargain," said Mr. Wood as Tom
proceeded to make out a check.  He gave little thought to the
threat Andy Foger had made, but the time was coming when he was to
remember it well.


CHAPTER III

A TIMELY WARNING

"Well, are you satisfied with your bargain, Tom?" asked Mr. Wood
when the formalities about transferring the ownership of the
motor-boat had been completed.

"Oh, yes, I calculated to pay just what I did."

"I'm glad you're satisfied, for Mr. Hastings told me to be sure
the purchaser was satisfied.  Here he comes now.  I guess he
wasn't at the auction."

An elderly gentleman was approaching Mr. Wood and Tom.  Most of
the throng was dispersing, but the young inventor noticed that
Andy Foger and Sam Snedecker stood to one side, regarding him
closely.

"So you got my boat," remarked the former owner of the craft.  "I
hope you will be able to fix it up."

"Oh, I think I shall," answered the new owner of the CARLOPA.  "If
I can't, father will help me."

"Yes, you have an advantage there.  Are you going to keep the same
name?" and Mr. Hastings seemed quite interested in what answer the
lad would make.

"I think not," replied Tom.  "It's a good name, but I want
something that tells more what a fast boat it is, for I'm going to
make some changes that will increase the speed."

"That's a good idea. Call it the Swift."

"Folks would say I was stuck up if I did that," retorted the youth
quickly.  "I think I shall call it the ARROW.  That's a good,
short name, and--"

"It's certainly speedy," interrupted Mr. Hastings.  "Well now,
since you're not going to use the name CARLOPA, would you mind if
I took it for my new boat? I have a fancy for it."

"Not in the least," said Tom.  "Don't you want the letters from
each side of the bow to put on your new craft?"

"It's very kind of you to offer them, and, since you will have no
need for them, I'll be glad to take them off."

"Come down to my boat," invited Tom, using the word "my" with a
proper pride, "and I'll take off the brass letters.  I have a
screw driver in my motor-cycle tool bag."

As the former and present owners of the ARROW (which is the name
by which I shall hereafter designate Tom's motor-boat) walked down
toward the dock where it was moored the young inventor gave a
startled cry.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Hastings.

"That man! See him at my motor-boat?" cried Tom.  He pointed to
the craft in the lake.  A man was in the cockpit and seemed to be
doing something to the forward bulkhead, which closed off the
compartment holding the gasoline tank.

"Who is he?" asked Mr. Hastings, while Tom started on a run toward
the boat.

"I don't know.  Some man who bid on the boat at the auction, but
who didn't go high enough," answered the lad.  As he neared the
craft the man sprang out, ran along the lakeshore for a short
distance and then disappeared amid the bushes which bordered the
estate of Mr. Hastings.  Tom hurriedly entered the ARROW.

"Did he do any damage?" asked Mr. Hastings.

"I guess he didn't have time," responded Tom.  "But he was
tampering with the lock on the door of the forward compartment.
What's in there?"

"Nothing but the gasoline tank.  I keep the bulkhead sliding door
locked on general principles.  I can't imagine what the fellow
would want to open it for.  There's nothing of value in there.
Perhaps he isn't right in his head.  Was he a tramp?"

"No, he was well dressed but he seemed very nervous during the
auction, as if he was disappointed not to have secured the boat.
Yet what could he want in that compartment? Have you the key to
the lock, Mr. Hastings?"

"Yes, it belongs to you now, Mr. Swift," and the former owner
handed it to Tom, who quickly unlocked the compartment.  He slid
back the door and peered within, but all he saw was the big
galvanized tank.

"Nothing in there he could want," commented the former owner of
the craft.

"No," agreed Tom in a low voice.  "I don't see what he wanted to
open the door for." But the time was to come, and not far off,
when Tom was to discover quite a mystery connected with the
forward compartment of his boat, and the solution of it was fated
to bring him into no little danger.

"It certainly is odd," went on Mr. Hastings when, after Tom had
secured the screw driver from his motor-cycle tool bag, he aided
the lad in removing the letters from the bow of the boat "Are you
sure you don't know the man?"

"No, I never saw him before.  At first I thought his voice sounded
like one of the members of the Happy Harry gang, but when I looked
squarely at him I could not see a bit of resemblance.  Besides,
that gang would not venture again into this neighborhood."

"No, I imagine not.  Perhaps he was only a curious, meddlesome
person.  I have frequently been bothered by such individuals.
They want to see all the working parts of an automobile or motor-
boat, and they don't care what damage they do by investigating."

Tom did not reply, but he was pretty certain that the man in
question had more of an object than mere curiosity in tampering
with the boat.  However, he could discover no solution just then,
and he proceeded with the work of taking off the letters.

"What are you going to do with your boat, now that you have it?"
asked Mr. Hastings.  "Can you run it down to your dock in the
condition in which it is now?"

"No, I shall have to go back home, get some tools and fix up the
motor.  It will take half a day, at least.  I will come back this
afternoon and, have the boat at my house by night.  That is if I
may leave it at your dock here."

"Certainly, as long as you like."

The young inventor had many things to think about as he rode
toward home, and though he was somewhat puzzled over the actions
of the stranger, he forgot about that in anticipating the pleasure
he would have when the motor-boat was in running order.

"I'll take dad off on a cruise about the lake," he decided.  "He
needs a rest, for he's been working hard and worrying over the
theft of the turbine motor model.  I'll take Ned Newton for some
rides, too, and he can bring his camera along and get a lot of
pictures.  Oh, I'll have some jolly sport this summer!"

Tom was riding swiftly along a quiet country road and was
approaching a steep hill, which he could not see until he was
close to it, owing to a sharp turn.

As he was about to swing around it and coast swiftly down the
steep declivity he was startled by hearing a voice calling to him
from the bushes at the side of the road.

"Hold on, dar I Hold on, Mistah Swift!" cried a colored man,
suddenly popping into view.  "Doan't go down dat hill."

"Why, it's Eradicate Sampson!" exclaimed Tom, quickly shutting off
the power and applying the brakes.  "What's the matter, Rad? Why
shouldn't I go down that hill?"

"Beca'se, Mistah Swift, dere's a pow'ful monstrous tree trunk
right across de road at a place whar yo' cain't see it till yo'
gits right on top ob it.  Ef yo' done hit dat ar tree on yo'
lickity-split machine, yo' suah would land in kingdom come.
Doan't go down dat hill!"

Tom leaped off his machine and approached the colored man.
Eradicate Sampson did odd jobs in the neighborhood of Shopton, and
more than once Tom had done him favors in repairing his lawn mower
or his wood-sawing machine.  In turn Eradicate had given Tom a
valuable clue as to the hiding place of the model thieves.

"How'd the log get across the road, Rad?" asked Tom.

"I dunno, Mistah Swift.  I see it when I come along wid mah mule,
Boomerang, an' I tried t' git it outer de way, but I couldn't.
Den I left Boomerang an' mah wagon at de foot ob de hill an' I
come up heah t' git a long pole t' pry de log outer de way.  I
didn't t'ink nobody would come along, case dis road ain't much
trabeled."

"I took it for a short cut," said the lad.  "Come on, let's take a
look at the log."

Leaving his machine at the top of the slope, the young inventor
accompanied the colored man 'down the hill.  At the foot of it,
well hidden from sight of any one who might come riding down, was
a big log.  It was all the way across the road.

"That never fell there," exclaimed Tom in some excitement.  "That
never rolled off a load of logs, even if there had been one along,
which there wasn't.  That log was put there!"

"Does yo' t'ink dat, Mistah Swift?" asked Eradicate, his eyes
getting big.

"I certainly do, and, if you hadn't warned me, I might have been
killed."

"Oh, I heard yo' lickity-split machine chug-chuggin' along when I
were in de bushes, lookin' for a pryin' pole, an' I hurried out to
warn yo.  I knowed I could leave Boomerang safe, 'case he's
asleep."

"I'm glad you did warn me," went on the youth solemnly.  Then, as
he went closer to the log, he uttered an exclamation.

"That has been dragged here by an automobile!" he cried.  "It's
been done on purpose to injure some one.  Come on, Rad, let's see
if we can't find out who did it."

Something on the ground caught Tom's eye.  He stooped and picked
up a nickle-plated wrench.

"This may come in handy as evidence," he murmured.


CHAPTER IV

TOM AND ANDY CLASH

Even a casual observer could have told that an auto had had some
part in dragging the log to the place where it blockaded the road.
In the dust were many marks of the big rubber tires and even the
imprint of a rope, which had been used to tow the tree trunk.

"What fo' yo' t'ink any one put dat log dere?" asked the colored
man as he followed Tom.  Boomerang, the mule, so called because
Eradicate said you never could tell what he was going to do,
opened his eyes lazily and closed them again.  "I don't know why,
Rad, unless they wanted to wreck an automobile or a wagon.  Maybe
tramps did it for spite."

"Maybe some one done it to make yo' hab trouble, Mistah Swift."

"No, I hardly think so.  I don't know of any one who would want to
make trouble for me, and how would they know I was coming this
way--"

Tom suddenly checked himself.  The memory of the scene at the
auction came back to him and he recalled what Andy Foger had said
about "'getting even."

"Which way did dat auto go?" resumed Eradicate.

"It came from down the road," answered Tom, not completing the
sentence he had left unfinished.  "They dragged the log up to the
foot of the hill and left it.  Then the auto went down this way."
It was comparatively easy, for a lad of such sharp observation as
was Tom, to trace the movements of the vehicle.

"Den if it's down heah, maybe we cotch 'em," suggested the colored
man.

The young inventor did not answer at once.  He was hurrying along,
his eyes on the telltale marks.  He had proceeded some distance
from the place where the log was when he uttered a cry.  At the
same moment he hurried from the road toward a thick clump of
bushes that were in the ditch alongside of the highway.  Reaching
them, he parted the leaves and called:

"Here's the auto, Rad!"

The colored man ran up, his eyes wider open than ever.  There,
hidden amid the bushes, was a large touring car.

"Whose am dat?" asked Eradicate.

Tom did not answer.  He penetrated the underbrush, noting where
the broken branches had been bent upright after the forced
entrance of the car, the better to hide it.  The young inventor
was, seeking some clew to discover the owner of the machine.  To
this end he climbed up in the tonneau and was looking about when
some one burst in through the screen of bushes and a voice cried:
"Here, you get out of my car!"

"Oh, is it your car, Andy Foger?" asked Tom calmly as he
recognized his squint-eyed rival.  "I was just beginning to think
it was.  Allow me to return your wrench," and he held out the one
he had picked up near the log.  "The next time you drag trees
across the road," went on the lad in the tonneau, facing the angry
and dismayed Andy, "I'd advise you to post a notice at the top of
the hill, so persons riding down will not be injured." "Notice--
road--hill--logs!" stammered Andy, turning red under his freckles.

"That's what I said," replied Tom coolly.

"I--I didn't have anything to do with putting a log across any
road," mumbled the bully.  "I--I've been off toward the creek."

"Have you?" asked Tom with a peculiar smile.

"I thought you might have been looking for the wrench you dropped
near the log.  You should be more careful and so should Sam
Snedecker, who's hiding outside the bushes," went on our hero, for
he had caught sight of the form of Andy's crony.  "I--I told him
not to do it!" exclaimed Sam as he came from his hiding place.

"Shut up!" exclaimed Andy desperately.

"Oh, I think I know your secret," continued the young inventor.
"You wanted to get even with me for outbidding you on the motor-
boat.  You watched which road I took, and then, in your auto, you
came a shorter way, ahead of me.  You hauled the log across the
foot of the hill, hoping, I suppose, that my machine would be
broken.  But, let me tell you, it was a risky trick.  Not only
might I have been killed, but so would whoever else who happened
to drive down the slope over the log, whether in a wagon or
automobile.  Fortunately Eradicate discovered it in time and
warned me.  I ought to have you arrested, but you're not worth it.
A good thrashing is what such sneaks as you deserve!"

"You haven't got any evidence against us," sneered Andy
confidently, his old bravado coming back.

"I have all I want," replied Tom.  "You needn't worry.  I'm not
going to tell the police.  But you've got to do one thing or I'll
make you sorry you ever tried this trick.  Eradicate will help me,
to don't think you're going to escape."

"You get out of my automobile!" demanded Andy.  "I'll have you
arrested if you don't."

"I'll get out because I'm ready to, but not on account of your
threats," retorted Mr. Swift's son.  "Here's your wrench.  Now I
want you and Sam to start up this machine and haul that log out of
the way."

"S'pose I won't do it?" snapped Andy.

"Then I'll cause your arrest, besides thrashing you into the
bargain! You can take your choice of removing the log so travelers
can pass or having a good hiding, you and Sam.  Eradicate, you
take Sam and I'll tackle Andy."

"Don't you dare touch me!" cried the bully, but there was a whine
in his tones.

"You let me alone or I'll tell my father!" added Sam.  "I--I
didn't have nothin' to do with it, anyhow.  I told Andy it would
make trouble, but he made me help him."

"Say, what's the matter with you?" demanded Andy indignantly of
his crony.  "Do you want to--"

"I wish I'd never come with you," went on Sam, who was beginning
to be frightened.

"Come now.  Start up that machine and haul the log out of the
way," demanded Tom again.

"I won't do it!" retorted the red-haired lad impudently.

"Yes, you will," insisted our hero, and he took a step toward the
bully.  They were out of the clump of bushes now and in the
roadside ditch.  "You let me alone," almost screamed Andy, and in
his baffled rage he rushed at Tom, aiming a blow.

The young inventor quickly stepped to one side, and, as the bully
passed him, Tom sent out a neat left-hander.  Andy Foger went down
in a heap on the grass.


CHAPTER V

A TEST OF SPEED

Whether Tom or Andy was the most surprised at the happening would
be hard to say.  The former had not meant to hit so hard and he
certainly did not intend to knock the squint-eyed youth down.  The
latter's fall was due, as much as anything, to his senseless,
rushing tactics and to the fact that he slipped on the green
grass.  The bully was up in a moment, however, but he knew better
than to try conclusions with Tom again.  Instead he stood out of
reach and spluttered:

"You just wait, Tom Swift! You just wait!"

"Well, I'm waiting," responded the other calmly.

"I'll get even with you," went on Andy.  "You think you're smart
because you got ahead of me, but I'll get square!"

"Look here!" burst out the young inventor determinedly, taking a
step toward his antagonist, at which Andy quickly retreated, "I
don't want any more of that talk from you, Andy Foger.  That's
twice you've made threats against me to-day.  You put that log
across the road, and if you try anything like it for your second
attempt I'll make you wish you hadn't.  That applies to you, too,
Sam," he added, glancing at the other lad.

"I--I ain't gone' to do nothin'," declared Sam.

"I told Andy not to put that tree--"

"Keep still, can't you!" shouted the bully.  "Come on.  We'll get
even with him, that's all," he muttered as he went back into the
bushes where the auto was.  Andy cranked up and he and his crony
getting into the car were about to start off.

"Hold on!" cried Tom.  "You'll take that log from across the road
or I'll have you arrested for obstructing traffic, and that's a
serious offense."

"I'm goin' to take it away!" growled Andy.  "Give a fellow a show
can't you?"

He cast an ugly look at Tom, but the latter only smiled.  It was
no easy task for Sam and Andy to pull the log out of the way, as
they could hardly lift it to slip the rope under.  But they
finally managed it, and, by the power of the car, hauled it to one
side.  Then they speed off.

"I 'clar t' gracious, dem young fellers am most as mean an'
contrary as mah mule Boomerang am sometimes," observed Eradicate.
"Only Boomerang ain't quite so mean as dat."

"I should hope not, Rad," observed Tom.  "I'm ever so much obliged
for your warning.  I guess I'll be getting, home now.  Come around
next week; we have some work for you."

"'Deed an' I will," replied the colored man.  "I'll come around
an' eradicate all de dirt on yo' place, Mistah Swift.  Yais, sah,
I's Eradicate by name, and dat's my perfession--eradicatin' dirt.
Much obleeged, I'll call around.  Giddap, Boomerang!"

The mule lazily flicked his ears, but did not stir, and Tom,
knowing the process of arousing the animal would take some time,
hurried up the hill to where he had left his motor-cycle.
Eradicate was still engaged on the task of trying to arouse his
steed to a sense of its duty when the young inventor flashed by on
his way home.

"So now you own a broken motor-boat," observed Mr. Swift when Tom
had related the circumstances of the auction.  "Well, now you have
it, what are you going to do with it?"

"Fix it, first of all," replied his son.  "It needs considerable
tinkering up, but nothing but what I can do, if you'll help me."

"Of course I will.  Do you think you can get any speed out of it?"

"Well, I'm not so anxious for speed.  I wart a good, comfortable
boat, and the ARROW will be that.  I've named it, you see.  I'm
going back to Lanton this afternoon, take some tools along, and
repair it so I can run the boat over to here.  Then I'll get at it
and fix it up.  I've got a plan for you, dad."

"What is it?" asked the inventor, his rather tired face lighting
up with interest.

"I'm going to take you on a vacation trip."

"A vacation trip?"

"Yes, you need a rest.  You've been working, too hard over that
gyroscope invention."

"Yes, Tom, I think I have," admitted Mr. Swift.  "But I am very
much interested in it, and I think I can get it to work.  If I do
it will make a great difference in the control of aeroplanes.  It
will make them more stable able to fly in almost any wind.  But I
certainly have puzzled my brains over some features of it.
However, I don't quite see what you mean."

"You need a rest, dad," said Mr. Swift's son kindly.  "I want you
to forget all about patents, invention, machinery and even the
gyroscope for a week or two.  When I get my motor-boat in shape
I'm going to take you and Ned Newton up the lake for a cruise.  We
can camp out, or, if we had to, we could sleep in the boat.  I'm
going to put a canopy on it and arrange some bunks.  It will do
you good and perhaps new ideas for your gyroscope may come to you
after a rest."

"Perhaps they will, Tom.  I am certainly tired enough to need a
vacation.  It's very kind of you to think of me in connection with
your boat.  But if you're going to get it this afternoon you'd
better start if you expect to get back by night.  I think Mrs.
Baggert has dinner ready."

After the meal Tom selected a number of tools from his, own
particular machine shop and carried them down to the dock on the
lake, where his two small boats were tied.

"Aren't you going back on your motor-cycle" asked his father. "No,
Dad, I'm going to row over to Lanton, and, if I can get the ARROW
fixed, 'I'll tow my rowboat back."

"Very well, then you won't be in any danger from Andy Foger.  I
must speak to his father about him."

"No, dad, don't," exclaimed the young inventor quickly.  "I can
fight my own battles with Andy.  I don't fancy he will bother me
again right away."

Tom found it more of a task than he had anticipated to get the
motor in shape to run the ARROW back under her own power.  The
magneto was out of order and the batteries needed renewing, while
the spark coil had short-circuited and took considerable time to
adjust.  But by using some new dry cells, which Mr. Hastings gave
him, and cutting out the magneto, or small dynamo which produces
the spark that exploded the gasoline in the cylinders, Tom soon
had a fine, "fat" hot spark from the auxiliary ignition system.
Then, adjusting the timer and throttle on the engine and seeing
that the gasoline tank was filled, the lad started up his motor.
Mr. Hastings helped him, but after a few turns of the flywheel
there were no explosions.  Finally, after the carburetor (which is
the device where gasoline is mixed with air to produce an
explosive mixture) had been adjusted, the motor started off as if
it had intended to do so all the while and was only taking its
time about it.

"The machine doesn't run as smooth as it ought to," commented Mr.
Hastings.  "No, it needs a thorough overhauling," agreed the owner
of the ARROW.  "I'll get at it to-morrow," and with that he swung
out into the lake, towing his rowboat after him.

"A motor-boat of my own!" exulted Tom as he twirled the steering
wheel and noted how readily the craft answered her helm.  "This is
great!"

He steered down the lake and then, turning around, went up it a
mile or more before heading for his own dock, as he wanted to see
how the engine behaved.

"With some changes and adjustments I can make this a speedy boat,"
thought Tom.  "I'll get right at it.  I shouldn't wonder if I
could make a good showing against Mr. Hastings' new CARLOPA,
though his boat's got four cylinders and mine has but two."

The lad was proceeding leisurely along the lakeshore, near his
home, with the motor throttled down to test it at low speed, when
he heard some one shout.  Looking toward the bank, Tom saw a man
waving his hands.

"I wonder what he wants?" thought our hero as he put the wheel
over to send his craft to shore.  He heard a moment later, for the
man on the bank cried:

"I say, my young friend, do you know anything about automobiles?
Of course you do or you wouldn't be running a motor-boat.  Bless
my very existence, but I'm in trouble!  My machine has stopped on
a lonely road and I can't seem to get it started.  I happened to
hear your boat and I came here to hail you.  Bless my coat-pockets
but I am in trouble!  Can you help me?  Bless my soul and
gizzard!"

"Mr. Damon" exclaimed Tom, shutting off the power, for he was now
near shore.  "Of course I'll help you, Mr. Damon," for the young
inventor had recognized the eccentric man of whom he had purchased
the motor-cycle and who had helped him in rounding up the thieves.

"Why, bless my shoe-laces, if it isn't Tom Swift!" exclaimed Mr.
Damon, who seemed very fond of calling down blessings upon himself
or upon articles of his dress or person.

"Yes '.  I'm here," admitted Tom with a laugh.

"And in a motor-boat, too! Bless my pocketbook, but did that run
away with some one who sold it to you cheap?"

"No, not exactly," and the lad explained how he had come into
possession of it.  By this time he was ashore and had tied the
ARROW to an overhanging tree.  Then Tom proceeded to where Mr.
Damon had left his stalled automobile.  The eccentric man was
wealthy and his physician had instructed him to ride about in the
car for his health.  Tom soon located the trouble.  The carburetor
had become clogged, and it was soon in working order again.

"Well, now that you have a boat ', I don't suppose you will be
riding about the country so much," commented Mr. Damon as he got
into his car.  "Bless my spark-plug! But if you ever get over to
Waterfield, where I live, come and see me.  It's handy to get to
by water."

"I'll come some day," promised the lad.

"Bless my hat band, but I hope so," went on the eccentric
individual as he prepared to start his car.

Tom completed the remainder of the trip to his house without
incident and his father came down to the dock to see the motor-
boat.  He agreed with his son that it was a bargain and that it
could easily be put in fine shape.

The youth spent all the next day and part of the following working
on the craft.  He overhauled the ignition system, which was the
jump-spark style, cleaned the magneto and adjusted the gasoline
and compression taps so that they fitted better.  Then he
readjusted the rudder lines, tightening them on the steering
wheel, and looked over the piping from the gasoline tank.

The tank was in the forward compartment, and, upon inspecting
this, the lad concluded to change the plan by which the big
galvanized iron box was held in place.  He took out the old wooden
braces and set them closer together, putting in a few new ones.

"The tank will not vibrate so when I'm going at full speed," he
explained to his father.

"Is that where the strange man was tampering with the lock the day
of the auction?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Yes, but I don't see what he could want in this compartment, do
you dad?"

The inventor got into the boat and looked carefully into the
rather dark space where the tank fitted.  He went over every inch
of it, and, pointing to one of the thick wooden blocks that
supported the tank, asked:

"Did you bore that hole in there, Tom?"

"No, it was there before I touched the braces.  But it isn't a
hole, or rather, someone bored it and stopped it up again.  It
doesn't weaken the brace any."

"No, I suppose not.  I was just wondering weather that was one of
the new blocks or an old one."

"Oh, an old one.  I'm going to paint them, too, so in case the
water leaks in or the gasoline leaks out the wood won't be
affected.  A gasoline tank should vibrate as little as possible,
if you don't want it to leak.  I guess I'll paint the whole
interior of this compartment white, then I can see away into the
far corners of it."

"I think that's a good idea," commented Mr. Swift.

It was four days after his purchase of the boat before Tom was
ready to make a long trip in it.  Up to that time he had gone on
short spins not far from the dock, in order to test the engine
adjustment.  The lad found it was working very well, but he
decided with a new kind of spark plugs for the two cylinders that
he could get more speed out of it.  Finally the forward
compartment was painted and a general overhauling given the hull
and Tom was ready to put, his boat to a good test.

"Come on, Ned," he said to his chum early one evening after Mr.
Swift had said he was too tired to go out on a trial run.  "We'll
see what the ARROW will do now."

From the time Tom started up the motor it was evident that the
boat was going through the water at a rapid rate.  For a mile or
more the two lads speeded along, enjoying it hugely.  Then Ned
exclaimed:

"Something's coming behind us."

Tom turned his head and looked.  Then he called out:

"It's Mr. Hastings in his new CARLOPA.  I wonder if he wants a
race?"

"Guess he'd have it all his own way," suggested Ned.

"Oh, I don't know.  I can get a little more speed out of my boat."

Tom waited until the former owner of the ARROW was up to him.

"Want a race?" asked Mr. Hastings good-naturedly.

"Sure!" agreed Tom, and he shoved the timer ahead to produce
quicker explosions.

The ARROW seemed to leap forward and for a moment was ahead of the
CARLOPA, but with a motion of his hand to the spark lever Mr.
Hastings also increased his speed.  For a moment the two boats
were on even terms and then the larger and newer one forged ahead.
Tom had expected it', but he was a little disappointed.

"That's doing first rate," complimented Mr. Hastings as he passed
them.  "Better than I was ever able to make her do even when she
was new, Tom."

This made the present owner of the ARROW feel somewhat consoled.
He and Ned ran on for a few miles, the CARLOPA in the meanwhile
disappearing from view around a bend.  Then Tom and his chum
turned around and made for the Swift dock.

"She certainly is a dandy!" declared Ned.  "I wish I had one like
it."

"Oh, I intend that you shall have plenty of rides in this," went
on his friend.  "When you get your vacation, you and dad and I are
going on a tour," and he explained his plan, which, it is needless
to say, met with Ned's hearty approval.

Just before going to bed, some hours later, Tom decided to go down
to the dock to make sure he had shut off the gasoline cock leading
from the tank of his boat to the motor.  It was a calm, early
summer night, with a new moon giving a little light, and the lad
went down to the lake in his slippers.  As he neared the boathouse
he heard a noise.

"Water rat," he murmured, "or maybe muskrats.  I must set some
traps."

As Tom entered the boathouse he started back in alarm, for a
bright light flashed up, almost in his eyes.

"Who's here?" he cried, and at that moment someone sprang out of
his motor-boat, scrambled into a rowing craft which the youth
could dimly make out in front of the dock and began to pull away
quickly.

"Hold on there!" cried the young inventor. "Who are you?  What do
you want?  Come back here!"

The person in the 'coat returned no answer.  With his heart doing
beats over-time Tom lighted a lantern and made a hasty examination
of the ARROW.  It did not appear to have been harmed, but a glance
showed that the door of the gasoline compartment had been unlocked
and was open.  Tom jumped down into his craft.

"Some one has been at that compartment again!" he murmured.  "I
wonder if it was the same man who acted so suspiciously at the
auction?  What can his object be, anyhow?"

The next moment he uttered an exclamation of startled surprise and
picked up something from the bottom of the boat.  It was a bunch
of keys, with a tag attached, bearing the owner's name.

"Andy Foger!" murmured Tom.  "So this is, how he was trying to get
even!  Maybe he started to put a hole in the tank or in my boat."


CHAPTER VI

TOWING SOME GIRLS

With a sense of anger mingled with an apprehension lest some harm
should have been done to his craft, the owner of the ARROW went
carefully over it.  He could find nothing wrong.  The engine was
all right and all that appeared to have been accomplished by the
unbidden visitor was the opening of the locked forward
compartment.  That this had been done by one of the many keys on
Andy Foger's ring was evident.

"Now what could have been his object?" mused Tom.  "I should think
if he wanted to put a hole in the boat he would have done it
amidships, where the water would have a better chance to come in,
or perhaps he wanted to flood it with gasoline and--"

The idea of fire was in Tom's mind, and he did not finish his
half-completed thought.

"That may have been it," he resumed after a hasty examination of
the gasoline tank, to make sure there were no leaks in it.  "To
get even with me for outbidding him on the boat, Andy may have
wanted to destroy the ARROW.  Well, of all the mean tricks, that's
about the limit!  But wait until I see him.  I've got evidence
against him," and Tom looked at the key ring.  "I could almost
have him arrested for this."

Going outside the boathouse, Tom stood on the edge of the dock and
peered into the darkness.  He could hear the faint sound of
someone rowing across the lake, but there was no light.

"He had one of those electric flash lanterns," decided Tom.  "If I
hadn't found his keys, I might have thought it was Happy Harry
instead of Andy."

The young inventor went back into the house after carefully
locking the boat compartment and detaching from the engine an
electrical device, without which the motor in the ARROW could not
be started.

"That will prevent them from running away with my boat, anyhow,"
decided Tom.  "And I'll tell Garret Jackson to keep a sharp watch
to-night." Jackson was the engineer at Mr. Swift's workshop.

Tom told his father of the happening and Mr. Swift was properly
indignant.  He wanted to go at once to see Mr. Foger and complain
of Andy's act, but Tom counseled waiting.

"I'll attend to Andy myself," said the young inventor.  "He's
getting desperate, I guess, or he wouldn't try to set the place on
fire.  But wait until I show him these keys."

Bright and early the next morning the owner of the motor-boat was
down to the dock inspecting it.  The engineer, who had been on
watch part of the night, reported that there had been no
disturbance, and Tom found everything all right.  "I wonder if I'd
better go over and accuse Andy now or wait until I see him and
spring this evidence on him?" thought our hero.  Then he decided
it would be better to wait.  He took the ARROW out after
breakfast, his father going on a short spin with him.

"But I must go back now and work on my gyroscope invention," said
Mr. Swift when about two hours had been spent on the lake.  "I am
making good progress with it."

"You need a vacation," decided Tom, "I'll be ready to take you and
Ned in about two weeks.  He will have two weeks off then and,
we'll have some glorious times together."

That afternoon Tom put some new style spark plugs in the cylinders
of his motor and found that he had considerably increased the
revolutions of the engine, due to a better explosion being
obtained.  He also made some minor adjustments and the next day he
went out alone for a long run.

Heading up the lake, Tom was soon in sight of a popular excursion
resort that was frequently visited by church and Sunday-school
organizations in the vicinity of Shopton.  The lad saw a number of
rowing craft and a small motor-boat circling around opposite the
resort and remarked: "There must be a picnic at the grove to-day.
Guess I'll run up and take a look."

The lad was soon in the midst of quite a flotilla of rowboats,
most of them manned by pretty girls or in charge of boys who were
giving sisters (their own or some other chap's) a trip on the
water.  Tom throttled his boat down to slow speed and looked with
pleasure on the pretty scene.  His boat attracted considerable
attention, for motor craft were not numerous on Lake Carlopa.

As our hero passed a boat, containing three very pretty young
ladies, Tom heard one of them exclaim:

"There he is now!  That's Tom Swift."

Something in the tones of the voice attracted his attention.  He
turned and saw a brown-eyed girl smiling at him.  She bowed and
asked, blushing the while:

"Well, have you caught any more runaway horses lately?"

"Runaway horses--why--what?  Oh, it's Miss Nestor!" exclaimed
the lad, recognizing the young lady whose steed he had frightened
one day when he was on his bicycle.  As told in the first volume
of this series, the horse had run away, being alarmed at the
flashing of Tom's wheel, and Miss Mary Nestor, of Mansburg, was in
grave danger.

"So you've given up the bicycle for the motor-boat," went on the
young lady.

"Yes," replied Tom with a smile, shutting off the power, "and I
haven't had a chance to save any girls since I've had it."

The two boats had drifted close together, and Miss Nestor
introduced her two companions to Tom.

"Don't you want to come in and take a ride?" he asked.

"Is it safe?" asked Jennie Haddon, one of the trio.

"Of course it is, Jennie, or he wouldn't be out in it," said Miss
Nestor hastily.  "Come on, let's get in.  I'm just dying for a
motor-boat ride."

"What will we do with our boat?" asked Katie Carson.

"Oh, I can tow that," replied the youth.  "Get right in and I'll
take you all around the lake."

"Not too far," stipulated the girl who had figured in the runaway.
"We must be back for lunch, which will be served in about an hour.
Our church and Sunday-school are having a picnic."

"Maybe Mr. Swift will come and have some lunch with us," suggested
Miss Carson, blushing prettily.

"Nothing would give me greater pleasure," answered Tom, and then
he laughed at his formal reply, the girls joining in.

"We'd be glad to have you," added Miss Haddon.  "Oh!" she suddenly
screamed, "the boat's tipping over!"

"Oh, no," Tom hastened to assure her, coming, to the side to help
her in.  "It just tilts a bit, with the weight of so many on one
side.  It couldn't capsize if it tried."

In another moment the three were in the roomy cockpit and Tom had
made the empty rowboat fast to the stern.  He was about to start
up when from another boat, containing two little girls and two
slightly larger boys, came a plaintive cry:

"Oh, mister, give us a ride!"

"Sure!" agreed Tom pleasantly.  "Just fasten your boat to the
other rowboat and I'll tow you."

One of the boys did this, and then, with three pretty girls as his
companions in the ARROW and towing the two boats, Tom started off.

The girls were very much interested in the craft and asked all
sorts of questions about how the engine operated.  Tom explained
as clearly as he could how the gasoline exploded in the cylinders,
about the electric spark and about the propeller.  Then, when he
had finished, Miss Haddon remarked naively:

"Oh, Mr. Swift, you've explained it beautifully, and I'm sure if
our teacher in school made things as clear as you have that I
could get along fine.  I understand all about it, except I don't
see what makes the engine go."

"Oh," said Tom faintly, and he wondering what would be the best
remark to make under the circumstances, when Miss Nestor created a
diversion by looking at her watch and exclaiming:

"Oh, girls, it's lunch time!  We must go ashore.  Will you kindly
put about, Mr. Swift--I hope that is the proper term--and--land
us--is that right?" and she looked archly at Tom.

"That's perfectly right," he admitted with a laugh and a glance
into the girl's brown eyes.  "I'll put you ashore at once," and he
headed for a small dock.

"And come yourself to take lunch with us, added Miss Haddon.

"I'm afraid I might be in the way," stammered Tom.  "I--I have a
pretty good appetite, and--"

"I suppose you think that girls on a picnic don't take much
lunch," finished Miss Nestor.  "But I assure you that we have
plenty, and that you will be very welcome," she added warmly.

"Yes, and I'd like to have him explain over again how the engine
works," went on Miss Haddon.  "I am so interested."

Tom helped the girls out, receiving their thanks as well as those
of the children in the second boat.  But as he walked with the
young ladies through the grove the young inventor registered a
mental vow that he would steer clear of explaining again how a
gasoline engine worked.

"Now come right over this way to our table," invited Miss Nestor.
"I want you to meet papa and mamma."

Tom followed her.  As he stepped from behind a clump of trees he
saw, standing not far away, a figure that seemed strangely
familiar.  A moment later the figure turned and Tom saw Andy Foger
confronting him.  At the sight of our hero the bully turned red
and walked quickly away, while Tom's fingers touched the ring of
keys in his pocket.


CHAPTER VII

A BRUSH WITH ANDY

So unexpected was his encounter with Andy that the young inventor
hardly knew how to act, especially since he was a guest of the
young ladies.  Tom did not want to do or say anything to embarrass
them or make a scene, yet he did want to have a talk, and a very
serious talk, with Andy Foger.

Miss Nestor must have noticed Tom's sudden start at his glimpse of
Andy, for she asked: "Did you see some one you knew, Mr. Swift?"

"Yes," replied Tom, "I did--er--that is--" He paused in some
confusion.

"Perhaps you'd like---that is prefer--to go with them instead of
taking lunch with girls who don't know anything about engines?"
she persisted.

"Oh, no indeed," Tom hastened to assure her.  "He--that is--the
person I saw wouldn't care to have me lunch with him," and the
youth smiled grimly.

"Would you like to bring him over to our table?" inquired Miss
Carson.  "We have plenty for him."

"No, I think that would hardly do," continued the lad, who tried
not to smile at the picture of the red-haired and squint-eyed Andy
Foger making one of a party with the girls.  The young ladies
fortunately had not noticed the bully, who was out of view by this
time.

Tom was presented to Mr. and Mrs. Nestor, who told him how glad
they were to meet the young man who had been instrumental in
saving their daughter from injury, if not death.  Tom was a bit
embarrassed, but bore the praise as well as he could, and he was
very glad when a diversion, in the shape of lunch, occurred.

After a meal on tables under the trees in the grove Tom took the
girls and some of their friends out in his motor-boat again.  They
covered several miles around the lake before returning to the
picnic ground.

As Tom was starting toward home in his boat, wondering what had
become of Andy and trying to think of a reason why the bully
should attend anything as "tame" as a church picnic, the object of
his thoughts came strolling through the trees down to the shore of
the lake.  The moment he saw Tom the red-haired lad started back,
but the young inventor, leaping out of his boat, called out:

"Hold on there, Andy Foger, I want to see you!" and there was
menace in Tom's tone.

"But, I don't want to see you!" retorted the other sulkily.  "I've
got no use for you."

"No more have I for you," was Tom's quick reply.  "But I want to
return you these keys.  You dropped them in my boat the other
night when you tried to set it afire.  If I ever catch you--"

"My keys!  Your boat!  On fire!" gasped Andy, so plainly
astonished that Tom knew his surprise was genuine.

"Yes, your keys.  You were a little, too quick for me or I'd have
caught you at it.  The next time you pick a lock don't leave your
keys behind you," and he held out the jingling ring.

Andy Foger advanced slowly.  He took the bunch of keys and looked
at the tag.

"They are mine," he said slowly, as if there was some doubt about
it.

"Of course they are," declared Tom.  "I found them where you
dropped them--in my boat."

"Do you mean over at the auction?"

"No, I mean down in my boathouse, where you sneaked in the other
night and tried to do some damage.

"The other night!" cried Andy.  "I never was near your boathouse
any night and I never lost my keys there!  I lost these the day of
the auction, on Mr. Hastings' ground, and I've been looking for
them ever since."

"Didn't you sneak in my boathouse the other night and try to do
some mischief?  Didn't you drop them then?"

"No, I didn't," retorted Andy earnestly.  "I lost those keys at
the auction, and I can prove it to you.  Look, I advertised for
them in the weekly Gazette."

The red-haired lad pulled a crumpled paper from his pocket and
showed Tom an advertisement offering a reward of two dollars for a
bunch of keys on a ring, supposed to have been lost at the auction
on Mr. Hastings' grounds in Lanton.  The finder was to return them
to Andy Foger.

"Does that look as if I lost the keys in your boathouse?" demanded
the bully sneeringly.  "I wouldn't have advertised them that way
if I' been trying to keep my visit quiet.  Besides, I can prove
that I was out of town several nights.  I was over to an
entertainment in Mansburg one night and I didn't get home until
two o'clock in the morning, because my machine broke down.  Ask
Ned Newton.  He saw me at the entertainment."

Andy's manner was so earnest that Tom could not help believing
him.  Then there was the evidence of the advertisement.  Clearly
the squint-eyed youth had not been the mysterious visitor to the
boathouse and had not unlocked the forward compartment.  But if it
was not he, who could it have been and how did the keys get there?
These were questions which racked Tom's brain.

"You can ask Ned Newton," repeated Andy.  "He'll prove that I
couldn't have been near your place, if you don't believe me."

"Oh, I believe you all right," answered Tom, for there could be no
doubting Andy's manner, even though he and the young inventor were
not on good terms.  "But how did your keys get in my boat?"

"I don't know, unless you found them, kept them and dropped them
there," was the insolent answer.

"You know better than that," exclaimed Tom.

"Well, I owe you a reward of two dollars for giving them back to
me," continued the bully patronizingly.  "Here it is," and he
hauled out some bills.

"I don't want your money!" fired back Tom.

"But I'd like to know who it was that was in my boat."

"And I'd like to know who it was took my keys," and Andy stuffed
the money back in his pocket.  Tom did not answer.  He was
puzzling over a queer matter and he wanted to be alone and think.
He turned aside from the red-haired lad and walked toward his
motor-boat.

"I'll give you a surprise in a few days," Andy called after him,
but Tom did not turn his head nor did he inquire what the surprise
might be.

Mr. Swift was somewhat puzzled when his son related the outcome of
the key incident.  He agreed with Tom that some one might have
found the ring and kept it, and that the same person might have
been the one whom Tom had surprised in the boathouse.

"But it's idle to speculate on it," commented the inventor.  "Andy
might have induced some of his chums to act for him in harming
your boat, and the key advertisement might have been only a ruse."

"I hardly think so," answered his son, shaking his head.  "It
strikes me as being very curious, and I'm going to see if I can't
get at the bottom of it."

But a week or more passed and Tom had no clew.  In the meanwhile
he was working away at his motor-boat, installing several
improvements.

One of these was a better pump, which circulated the water around
the cylinders, and another was a new system of lubrication under
forced feed.

"This ought to give me a little more speed," reasoned Tom, who was
not yet satisfied with his craft.  "Guess I'll take it out for a
spin."

He was alone in the ARROW, taking a long course up the lake when,
as he passed a wooded point that concealed from view a sort of
bay, he heard the puffing of another motor-boat.

"Maybe that's Mr. Hastings," thought Tom.  "If I raced with him
now, I think the ARROW could give a better account of herself."

The young inventor looked at the boat as it came into view.  It
needed but a glance to show that it was not the CARLOPA.  Then, as
it came nearer, Tom saw a familiar figure in it--a red-haired,
squint-eyed chap.

"Andy Foger!" exclaimed Tom.  "He's got a motor-boat!  This is the
surprise he spoke of."

The boat was rapidly approaching him, and he saw that it was
painted a vivid red.  Then he could make out the name on the bow,
RED STREAK.  Andy was sending the craft toward him at a fast rate.

"You needn't think you're the only one on this lake who has a
gasoline boat!" called Andy boastfully.  "This is my new one and
the fastest thing afloat around here.  I can go all around you.
Do you want to race?"

It was a "dare," and Tom never took such things when he could
reasonably enter a contest.  He swung his boat around so as to
shoot alongside of Andy and answered:

"Yes, I'll race you.  Where to?"

"Down opposite Kolb's dock and back to this point," was the
answer.  "I'll give you a start, as my engine has three cylinders.
This is a racing boat."

"I don't need any start," declared Tom.  "I'll race you on even
terms.  Go ahead!"

Both lads adjusted their timers to get more speed.  The water
began to curl away from the sharp prows, the motors exploded
faster and faster.  The race was on between the ARROW and the RED
STREAK.


CHAPTER VIII

OFF ON A TRIP

Glancing with critical eyes at the craft of his rival, Tom saw
that Andy Foger had a very fine boat.  The young inventor also
realized that if he was to come anywhere near winning the race he
would have to get the utmost speed out of his engine, for the new
boat the bully had was designed primarily, for racing, while Tom's
was an all-around pleasure craft, though capable of something in
the speed line.

"I'll be giving you a tow in a few minutes, as soon as my engine
gets warmed up!" sneered Andy.

"Maybe," said Tom, and then he crouched down to make as little
resistance as possible to the wind.  Andy, on the contrary, sat
boldly upright at the auto steering wheel of his boat.

On rushed the two motor craft, their prows exactly even and the
propellers tossing up a bulge in the water at their sterns.
Rapidly acquiring speed after the two lads had adjusted the timers
on their motors, the boats were racing side by side, seemingly on
even terms.

The RED STREAK had a very sharp prow, designed to cut through
the water. It was of the type known as an automobile launch.
That is, the engine was located forward, under a sort of hood,
which had two hinged covers like a bat's wings. The
steering-wheel shaft went through the forward bulkhead,
slantingly, like the wheel of an auto, and was arranged with
gasoline and sparking levers on the center post in a similar
manner. At the right of the wheel was a reversing lever, by
which the propeller blades could be set at neutral, or arranged
so as to drive the boat backward. Altogether the RED STREAK was
a very fine boat and had cost considerably more than had Tom's,
even when the latter was new. All these things the young owner
of the ARROW thought of as he steered his craft over the course.

"I hardly think I can win," Tom remarked to himself in a whisper.
"His boat is too speedy for this one.  I have a chance, though,
for his engine is new, and I don't believe he understands it as
well as I do mine.  Then, too, I am sure I have a better ignition
system."

But if Tom had any immediate hopes of defeating Andy, they were
doomed to disappointment, for about two minutes after the race
started the RED STREAK forged slowly ahead.

"Come on!" cried the red-haired lad.  "I thought you wanted a
race."

"I do," answered the young inventor.  "We're a long way from the
dock yet, and we've got to come back."

"You'll be out of it by the time I get to the dock," declared
Andy.

Indeed it began to look so, for the auto boat was now a full
length ahead of Tom's craft and there was open water between them.
But our hero knew a thing or two about racing, though he had not
long been a motor-boat owner.  He adjusted the automatic oiler on
the cylinders to give more lubrication, as he intended to get more
speed out of his engine.  Then he opened the gasoline cock a
trifle more and set his timer forward a few notches to get an
earlier spark.  He was not going to use the maximum speed just
yet, but he first wanted to see how the motor of the ARROW would
behave under these conditions.  To his delight he saw his boat
slowly creeping up on Andy's.  The latter, with a glance over his
shoulder, saw it too, and he advanced his spark.  His craft forged
ahead, but the rate of increase was not equal to Tom's.  "If I can
keep up to him I suppose I ought to be glad," thought the young
inventor, "for his boat is away ahead of mine in rating."

Through the water the sharp bows cut.  There were only a few
witnesses to the race, but those who were out in boats saw a
pretty sight as the two speedy craft came on toward the dock,
which was the turning point.

Andy's boat reached it first, and swung about in a wide circle for
the return.  Tom decided it was time to make his boat do its best,
so he set the timer at the limit, and the spark, coming more
quickly, increased the explosions.

Up shot the ARROW and, straightening out after the turn, Tom's
craft crept along until it lapped the stern of the RED STREAK.
Andy looked back in dismay.  Then he tried to get more speed out
of his engine.  He did cause the screw to revolve a little faster,
and Tom noted that he was again being left behind.  Then one of
those things, which may happen at any time to a gasoline motor,
happened to Andy's.  It began to miss explosions.  At first it was
only occasionally, then the misses became more frequent.

The owner of the RED STREAK with one hand on the steering wheel,
tried with the other to adjust the motor to get rid of the
trouble, but he only made it worse.  Andy's boat began to fall
back and Tom's to creep up.  Frantically Andy worked the gasoline
and sparking levers, but without avail.  At last one cylinder went
completely out of service.

The two boats were now on even terms and were racing along side by
side toward the wooded, point, which marked the finish.

"I'll beat you yet!" exclaimed Andy fiercely.

"Better hurry up!" retorted Tom.

But the young inventor was not to have it all his own way.  With a
freakishness equal to that with which it had ceased to explode the
dead cylinder came to life again, and the RED STREAK shot ahead.
Once more Andy's boat had the lead of a length and the finish of
the race was close at hand.  The squint-eyed lad turned and
shouted: "I told you I'd beat you!  Want a tow now?"

It began to look as though Tom would need it, but he still had
something in reserve.  One of the improvements he had put in the
ARROW was a new auxiliary ignition system.  This he now decided to
use.

With a quick motion Tom threw over the switch that put it into
operation.  A hotter, "fatter" spark was at once produced, and
adjusting his gasoline cock so that a little more of the fluid
would be drawn in, making a "richer" mixture, the owner of the
ARROW saw the craft shoot forward as if, like some weary runner,
new life had been infused.

In vain did Andy frantically try to get more speed out of his
motor.  He cut out the muffler, and the explosions sounded loudly
over the lake.  But it was no use.  A minute later the ARROW,
which had slowly forged ahead, crossed the bows of the RED STREAK
opposite the finishing point, and Tom had won the race.

"Well, was that fair?" our hero called to Andy, who had quickly
shut off some of his power as he saw his rival's daring trick.
"Did I beat you fair?"

"You wouldn't have beaten me if my engine hadn't gone back on me,"
grumbled Andy, chagrin showing on his face.  "Wait until my motor
runs smoother and I'll give you a big handicap and beat you.  My
boat's faster than yours.  It ought to be.  It cost fifteen
hundred dollars and it's a racer."

"I guess it doesn't like racing," commented Tom as he swung the
prow of his craft down the lake toward his home.  But he knew
there was some truth in what Andy had said.  The RED STREAK was a
more speedy boat, and, with proper handling, could have beaten the
ARROW.  That was where Tom's superior knowledge came in useful.
"Just you wait, I'll beat you yet," called Andy, after the young
inventor, but the latter made no answer.  He was satisfied.

Mr. Swift was much interested that night in his son's account of
the race.

"I had no idea yours was such a speedy boat," he said.

"Well, it wasn't originally," admitted Tom, "but the improvements
I put on it made it so.  But, dad, when are we going on our tour?
You look more worn out than I've seen you in some time, not
excepting when the turbine model was stolen.  Are you worrying
over your gyroscope invention?"

"Somewhat, Tom.  I can't seem to hit on just what I want.  It's a
difficult problem."

"Then I tell you what let's do, dad.  Let's drop everything in the
inventive line and go off on a vacation.  I'll take you up the
lake in my boat and you can spend a week at the Lakeview Hotel at
Sandport.  It will do you good."

"What will you do, Tom?"

"Oh, Ned Newton and I will cruise about and we'll take you along
any time you want to go.  We're going to camp out nights or sleep
in the boat if it rains.  I've ordered a canopy with side
curtains.  Ned and I don't care for the hotel life in the summer.
Will you go?"

Mr. Swift considered a moment.  He did need a rest, for he had
been working hard and his brain was weary with thinking of many
problems.  His son's program sounded very attractive.

"I think I will accept," said the inventor with a smile.  "When
can you start, Tom?"

"In about four days.  Ned Newton, will get his vacation then and
I'll have the canopy on.  I'll start to work at it to-morrow.
Then we'll go on a trip."

Sandport was a summer resort at the extreme southern end of Lake
Carlopa, and Mr. Swift at once wrote to the Lakeview Hotel there
to engage a room for himself.  In the meanwhile Tom began to put
the canopy on his boat and arrange for the trip, which would take
nearly a whole day.  Ned Newton was delighted with the prospect of
a camping tour and helped Tom to get ready.  They took a small
tent and plenty of supplies, with some food.  They did not need to
carry many rations, as the shores of the lake were lined with
towns and villages where food could be procured.

Finally all was ready for the trip and the night before the start
Ned Newton stayed at Tom's house so as to be in readiness for
going off early in the morning.  The day was all that could be
desired, Tom noted, as he and his chum hurried down to the dock
before breakfast to put their blankets in the boat.  As the young
inventor entered the craft he uttered an exclamation.

"What's the matter?" asked Ned.

"I was sure I locked the sliding door of that forward
compartment," was the reply.  "Now it's open."  He looked inside
the space occupied by the gasoline tank and cried out:  "One of
the braces is gone!  There's been some one at my boat in the night
and they tried to damage her."

"Much harm done?" asked Ned anxiously.

"No, none at all, to speak of," replied Tom.  "I can easily put a
new block under the tank.  In fact, I don't really need all I
have.  But why should any one take one out, and who did it?
That's what I want to know."

The two lads looked carefully about the dock and boat for a sign
of the missing block or any clews that might show who had been
tampering with the ARROW, but they could find nothing.

"Maybe the block fell out," suggested Ned.

"It couldn't," replied Tom.  "It was one of the new ones I put in
myself and it was nailed fast.  You can see where it's been pried
loose.  I can't, understand it," and Tom thought rapidly of
several mysterious occurrences of late in which the strange man at
the auction and the person he had surprised one night in the
boathouse had a part.

"Well, it needn't delay our trip," resumed the young inventor.
"Maybe there's a hoodoo around here, and it will do us good to get
away a few days.  Come on, we'll have breakfast, get dad and
start."

A little later the ARROW was puffing away up the lake in the
direction of Sandport.


CHAPTER IX

MR. SWIFT IS ALARMED

"Don't you feel better already, dad?" asked Tom that noon as they
stopped under a leaning, overhanging tree for lunch on the shore
of the lake.  "I'll leave it to Ned if you don't look more
contented and less worried."

"I believe he does," agreed the other lad.  "Well, I must say I
certainly have enjoyed the outing so far," admitted the inventor
with a smile.  "And I haven't been bothering about my gyroscope.
I think I'll take another sandwich, Tom, and a few more olives."

"That's the way to talk!" cried the son.  "Your appetite is
improving, too.  If Mrs. Baggert could see you she'd say so."

"Oh, yes, Mrs. Baggert.  I do hope she and Garret will look after
the house and shops well," said Mr. Swift, and the old, worried
look came like a shadow over his face.

"Now don't be thinking of that, dad," advised Tom, "Of course
everything will be all right.  Do you think some of those model
thieves will return and try to get some of your other inventions?"

"I don't know, Tom.  Those men were unscrupulous scoundrels, and
you can never tell what they might do to revenge themselves on us
for defeating their plans."

"Well, I guess Garret and Mrs. Baggert will look out for them,"
remarked his son.  "Don't worry."

"Yes, it's bad for the digestion," added Ned.  "If you don't mind,
Tom, I'll have some more coffee and another sandwich myself."

"Nothing the matter with your appetite, either," commented the
young inventor as he passed the coffee pot and the plate.

They were soon on their way again, the ARROW making good time up
the lake.  Tom was at the engine, making several minor adjustments
to it, while Ned steered.  Mr. Swift reclined on one of the
cushioned seats under the shade of the canopy.  The young owner of
the ARROW looked over the stretch of water from time to time for a
possible sight of Andy Foger, but the RED STREAK was not to be
seen.  The Lakeview Hotel was reached late that afternoon and the
boat was tied up to the dock, while Tom and Ned accompanied Mr.
Swift to see him comfortably established in his room.

"Won't you stay to supper with me?" invited the inventor to his
son and the latter's chum.  "Or do you want to start right in on
camp life?"

"I guess we'll stay to supper and remain at the hotel to-night,"
decided Tom.  "We got here a little later than I expected, and Ned
and I hardly have time to go very far and establish a temporary
camp.  We'll live a life of luxurious ease to-night and begin to
be 'wanderlusters' and get back to nature to-morrow."

In the morning Tom and his chum, full of enthusiasm for the
pleasures before them, started off, promising to come back to the
hotel in a few days to see how Mr. Swift felt.  The trip had
already done the man good and his face wore a brighter look.

Tom and Ned, in the speedy ARROW, cruised along the lakeshores all
that morning.  At noon they, went ashore, made a temporary camp
and arranged to spend the night there in the tent.  After this was
erected they got out their fishing tackle and passed the afternoon
at that sport, having such good luck that they provided their own
supper without having to depend on canned stuff.

They lived this life for three days, making a new camp each night,
being favored with good weather, so that they did not have to
sleep in the boat to keep dry.  On the afternoon of the third
day Tom, with a critical glance at the sky, remarked:

"I shouldn't be surprised if it rained to-morrow, Ned."

"Me either.  It does look sort of hazy, and the wind is in a bad
quarter."

"Then what do you say to heading for the hotel?  I fancy dad will
be glad to see us." "That suits me.  We can start camp life again
after the storm passes."

They started for Sandport that afternoon.  When within about two
miles of the hotel dock Tom saw, just ahead of them, a small
motor-boat.  Ned observed it too and called out:

"S'pose that's Andy looking for another race?"

"No, the boat's too small for his.  We'll put over that way and
see who it is."

The other craft did not appear to be moving very rapidly and the
ARROW was soon overhauling it.  As the two chums came nearer they
could hear the puffing of the motor.  Tom listened with critical
ears.

"That machine isn't working right," he remarked to his chum.

At that moment there sounded a loud explosion from the other boat
and at the same time there came over the water a shrill cry of
alarm.  "That's a girl in that boat!" exclaimed Ned.  "Maybe she's
hurt."

"No, the motor only backfired," observed Tom.  "But we'll go over
and see if we can help her.  Perhaps she doesn't understand it.
Girls don't know much about machinery."

A little later the ARROW shot up alongside the other craft, which
had come to a stop.  The two lads could see a girl bending over
the motor, twirling the flywheel and trying to get it started.
"Can I help you?" asked Tom, shutting off the power from his
craft.

The young lady glanced up.  Her face was red and she seemed ill at
ease.  At the sight of the young inventor she uttered an
exclamation of relief.

"Why, Mr. Swift!" she cried.  "Oh, I'm in such trouble.  I can't
make the machine work, and I'm afraid it's broken; it exploded."

"Miss Nestor!" blurted out Tom, more surprised evidently to see
his acquaintance of the runaway again than she was at beholding
him.  "I didn't know you ran a motor-boat," he added.  "I don't,"
said she simply and helplessly.  "That's the trouble, it won't
run."

"How comes it that you are up here?" went on Tom.

"I am stopping with friends, who have a cottage near the Lakeview
Hotel.  They have a motor-boat and I got Dick Blythe--he's the
owner of this--to show me how to run it.  I thought I knew, and I
started out a little while ago.  At first it went beautifully, but
a few minutes ago it blew up, or--or something dreadful
happened."

"Nothing very dreadful, I guess," Tom assured her.  "I think I can
fix it."  He got into the other boat and soon saw what the trouble
was.  The carburetor had gotten out of adjustment and the gasoline
was not feeding properly.  The young inventor soon had it in
order, and, testing the motor, found that it worked perfectly.

"Oh, I can't thank you enough," cried Miss Nestor with a flash
from her brown eyes that made Tom's heart beat double time.  "I
was afraid I had damaged the boat, and I knew Dick, who is a sort
of second cousin of mine, would never forgive me."

"There's no harm done," Tom assured her.  "But you had better keep
near us on your way back, that is, if you are going back."

"Oh, indeed I am.  I was frightened when I found I'd come so far
away from shore, and then, when that explosion took place--well,
you can imagine how I felt.  Indeed I will keep near you.  Are you
stopping near here?  If you are, I wish you'd come and see me, you
and Mr. Newton" she added, for Tom had introduced his chum.

"I'll be very glad to," answered our hero, and he told how he
happened to be in the neighborhood.  "I'll give you a few lessons
in managing a boat, if you like," he added.

"Oh, will you?  That will be lovely!  I won't tell Dick about it,
and I'll surprise him some day by showing him how well I can run
his boat."

"Good idea," commented Tom.

He started the motor for Miss Nestor, having stopped it after his
first test, and then, with the DOT, which was the name of the
small boat Miss Nestor was in, following the larger ARROW, the run
back to the hotel was made.  The young lady turned off near the
Lakeview dock to go to the cottage where she was stopping and the
lads tied up at the hotel boathouse.

"Yes, we are in for a storm," remarked Tom as he and his chum
walked up toward the hotel.  "I wonder how dad is?  I hope the
outing is doing him good."

"There he comes now," observed Ned, and, looking up, Tom saw his
father approaching.  The young inventor was at once struck by the
expression on his parent's face.  Mr. Swift looked worried and Tom
anxiously hastened forward to meet him.

"What's the matter dad?" he asked as cheerfully as he could.
"Have you been figuring over that gyroscope problem again, against
my express orders?" and he laughed a little.

"No, Tom, it's not the gyroscope that's worrying me."

"What is it then?"

"Those scoundrels are around again, Tom!" and Mr. Swift looked
apprehensively about him.

"You mean the men who stole the turbine model?"

"Yes.  I was walking in the woods near the hotel yesterday and I
saw Anson Morse.  He did not see me, for I turned aside as quickly
as I had a glimpse of him.  He was talking to another man."

"What sort of a man?"

"Well, an ordinary enough individual, but I noticed that he had
tattooed on the little finger of his left hand a blue ring."

"Happy Harry, the tramp!" exclaimed Tom.  "What can he and Morse
be doing here?"

"I don't know, Tom, but I'm worried.  I wish I was back home.  I'm
afraid something may happen to some of my inventions.  I want to
go back to Shopton, Tom."

"Nonsense, dad.  Don't worry just because you saw some of your
former enemies.  Everything is all right at home.  Mrs. Baggert
and Garret Jackson will look after things.  But, if you like, I,
can find out for you how matters are."

"How, Tom?"

"By taking a run down there in my motor-boat.  I can do it
to-morrow and get back by night, if I start early.  Then you will
not worry."

"All right, Tom; I wish you would.  Come up to my room and we will
talk it over.  I'd rather leave you go than telephone, as I don't
like to talk of my business over the wire if I can avoid it."


CHAPTER X

A CRY FOR HELP

"Now, dad, tell me all about it," requested Tom when he and Ned
were in Mr. Swift's apartment at the hotel, safe from the rain
that was falling.  "How did you happen to see Anson Morse and
Happy Harry?" My old readers will doubtless remember that the
latter was the disguised tramp who was so vindictive toward Tom,
while Morse was the man who endeavored to sneak in Mr. Swift's
shop and steal a valuable invention.

"Well, Tom," proceeded the inventor, "there isn't much to tell.  I
was out walking in the woods yesterday, and when I was behind a
clump of bushes I heard voices.  I looked out and there I saw the
two men."

"At first I thought they were trailing me, but I saw that they had
not seen me, and I didn't see how they could know I was in the
neighborhood.  So I quietly made my way back to the hotel."

"Could you hear what they were saying?"

"Not all, but they seemed angry over something.  The man with the
blue ring on his finger asked the other man whether Murdock had
been heard from."

"Who is Murdock?"

"I don't know, unless he is another member of the gang or unless
that is an assumed name."

"It may be that.  What else did you hear?"

"The man we know as Morse replied that he hadn't heard from him,
but that he suspected Murdock was playing a double game.  Then the
tramp--Happy Harry--asked this question: 'Have you any clew to
the sparkler?' And Morse answered: 'No, but I think Murdock has
hid it somewhere and is trying to get away with it without giving
us our share.' Then the two men walked away, and I came back to
the hotel," finished Mr. Swift.

"Sparkler," murmured Tom.  "I wonder what that can be?"

"That's a slang word for diamonds," suggested Ned.

"So it is.  In that case, dad, I think we have nothing to worry
about.  Those fellows must be going to commit a diamond robbery or
perhaps it has already taken place."

The inventor seemed relieved at this theory of his son.  His face
brightened and he said: "If they are going to commit a robbery,
Tom, we ought to notify the police."

"But if they said that 'Murdock,' whoever he is, had the sparkler
and was trying to get away with it without giving them their
share, wouldn't that indicate that the robbery had already taken
place?" asked Ned.

"That's so," agreed Tom.  "But it won't do any harm to tell the
hotel detective that suspicious characters are around, no matter
if the has been committed.  Then he can be on the lookout.  But I
don't think we have anything to worry about, dad.  Still, if you
like, I'll take a run down to the house to see that everything is
all right, though I'm sure it will be found that we have nothing
to be alarmed over."

"Well, I will be more relieved if you do," said the inventor,
"However, suppose we have a good supper now and you boys can stay
at the hotel to-night.  Then you and Ned can start off early in
the morning."

"All right," agreed Tom, but there was a thoughtful look on his
face and he appeared to be planning something that needed careful
attention to details.

After supper that night Tom took his chum to one side and asked:
"Would you mind very much if you didn't make the trip to Shopton
with me?"

"No, Tom, of course not, if it will help you any.  Do you want me
to stay here?"

"I think it will be a good plan.  I don't like to leave dad alone
if those scoundrels are around.  Of course he's able to look after
himself, but sometimes he gets absent minded from thinking too
much about his inventions."

"Of course I'll stay here at the hotel.  This is just as good a
vacation as I could wish."

"Oh, I don't mean all the while.  Just a day or so--until I come
back.  I may be here again by to-morrow night and find that my
father is needlessly alarmed.  Then something may have happened at
home and I would be delayed.  If I should be, I'd feel better to
know that you were here."

"Then I'll stay, and if I see any of those men--"

"You'd better steer clear of them," advised Tom quickly.  "They
are dangerous customers."

"All right.  Then I'll go over and give Miss Nestor lessons on how
to run a motor-boat," was the smiling response.  "I fancy, with
what she and I know, we can make out pretty well."

"Hold on there!" cried Tom gaily.  "No trespassing, you know."

"Oh, I'll just say I'm your agent," promised Ned with a grin.
"You can't object to that."

"No, I s'pose not.  Well, do the best you can.  She is certainly a
nice girl."

"Yes, but you do seem to turn up at most opportune times.  Luck is
certainly with you where she is concerned.  First you save her in
a runaway--"

"After I start the runaway," interrupted Tom.

"Then you take her for a ride in your motor-boat, and, lastly, you
come to her relief when she is stalled in the middle of the lake.
Oh you certainly are a lucky dog!"

"Never mind, I'm giving you a show.  Now let's get to bed early,
as I want to get a good start."

Tom awoke to find a nasty, drizzling rainstorm in progress, and
the lake was almost hidden from view by a swirling fog.  Still he
was not to be daunted from his trip to Shopton by the weather,
and, after a substantial breakfast, he bade his father and Ned
good-by and started off in the ARROW.

The canopy he had provided was an efficient protection against the
rain, a celluloid window in the forward hanging curtains affording
him a view so that he could steer.

Through the mist puffed the boat, the motor being throttled down
to medium speed, for Tom was not as familiar with the lake as he
would like to have been, and he did not want to run aground or
into another craft.

He was thinking over what his father had told him about the
presence of the men and vainly wondering what might be their
reference to the "sparkler."  His thoughts also dwelt on the
curious removal of the bracing block from under the gasoline tank
of his boat.

"I shouldn't be surprised but what Andy Foger did that," he mused.
"Some day he and I will have a grand fight, and then maybe he'll
let me alone.  Well, I've got other things to think about now.
The hotel detective can keep a lookout for the men around the
hotel, after the, warning I gave him, and I'll see that all is
right at home."

The fog lifted somewhat and Tom put on more speed.  As he was
steering the boat along near shore he heard, off to the woods at
his right, the report of a gun.  It came so suddenly that he
jumped involuntarily.  A moment later there sounded, plainly
through the damp air, a cry for help.

"Some one's hurt--shot" cried the youth aloud.

He turned the boat in toward the bank.  As he shut off the power
from the motor he heard the cry again:

"Help! Help!  Help!"

"I must go ashore!" he exclaimed.  "Probably some one is badly
wounded by a gun."

He paused for a moment as the fear came to him that it might be
some of the patent thieves.  Then, dismissing that idea as the
ARROW's prow touched the gravel, Tom sprang out, drew the boat up
a little way, fastened the rope to a tree and hurried off into the
dripping woods in the direction of the voice that was calling for
aid.


CHAPTER XI

A QUICK RUN

"Where are you?"  cried Tom.  "Are you hurt?  Where are you?"

Uttering these words after he had hurried into the woods a short
distance, the young inventor paused for an answer.  At first he
could hear nothing but the drip of water from the branches of the
trees; then, as he listened intently, he became aware of a groan
not far away.

"Where are you?"  cried the lad again.  "I've come to help you.
Where are you?"

He had lost what little fear he had had at first, that it might be
one of the unscrupulous gang, and came to the conclusion that he
might safely offer to help.

Once more the groan sounded and it was followed by a faint voice
speaking:

"Here I am, under the big oak tree.  Oh, whoever you are, help me
quickly!  I'm bleeding to death!"

With the sound of the voice to guide him, Tom swung around.  The
appeal had come from the left and, looking in that direction, he
saw, through the mist, a large oak tree.  Leaping over the
underbrush toward it he caught sight of the wounded man at its
foot.  Beside him lay a gun and there was a wound in the man's
right arm.

"Who shot you?"  cried Tom, hurrying to the side of the man.  "Was
it some of those patent thieves?"  Then, realizing that a stranger
would know nothing of the men who had stolen the model, Tom
prepared to change the form of his question.  But, before he had
an opportunity to do this, the man, whose eyes were closed, opened
them, and, as he got a better sight of his face, Tom uttered a
cry.

"Why, it's Mr. Duncan!"  exclaimed the lad.  He had recognized the
rich hunter, whom he had first met in the woods that spring
shortly after Happy Harry, the tramp, had disabled Tom's motor-
cycle.  "Mr. Duncan," the young inventor repeated, "how did you
get shot?"

"Is that you, Tom Swift?"  asked the gunner.  "Help me, please.  I
must stop this bleeding in my arm.  I'll tell you about it
afterward.  Wind something around it tight--your handkerchief
will do."

The man sighed weakly and his eyes closed again.  The lad saw the
blood spurting from an ugly wound.

"I must make a tourniquet," the youth exclaimed.  "That will check
the bleeding until I can get him to a doctor."

With Tom to think was to act.  He took out his knife and cut off
Mr. Duncan's sleeves below the injury, slashing through coat and
shirts.  Then he saw that part of a charge of shot had torn away
some of the large muscular development of the upper arm.  The
hunter seemed to have fainted and the youth worked quickly.  Tying
his handkerchief above the wound and inserting a small stone under
the cloth, so that the pebble would press on the main artery, Tom
put a stick in the handkerchief and began to twist it.  This had
the effect of tightening the linen around the arm, and in a few
seconds the lad was glad to see that the blood had stopped
spurting out with every beat of the heart.  Giving the tourniquet
a few more twists to completely stop the flow of blood, Tom
fastened the stick-lever in place by a bit of string.

"That's--that's better," murmured Mr. Duncan.  "Now if you can go
for a doctor--"  He had to pause for breath.

"I'll not leave you here alone while I go for a doctor," declared
Tom.  "I have my motor-boat on the lake.  Do you think I could get
you down to it and take you home?"

"Perhaps--maybe.  I'll be stronger in a moment, now that the
bleeding has stopped.  But not--not home--frighten my wife.
Take me to the sanitarium if you can--sanitarium up the lake, a
few miles from here."

The unfortunate man, who had tried to sit upright, had to lean
back against the tree again.  Tom understood what he meant in
spite of the broken sentences.  Mr. Duncan did not want to be
taken home in the condition he was then in, for fear of alarming
his wife.  He wanted to be taken to the sanitarium, and Tom knew
where this was, a well-known resort for the treatment of various
diseases and surgical cases.  It was about five miles away and on
the opposite shore of the lake.

"Water--a drink!"  murmured Mr. Duncan.

Seeing that his patient would be all right, for a few minutes at
least, Tom hurried to his motor-boat, got a cup and, filling it
with water from a jug he carried, he hastened with it to the
hunter.  The fluid revived the man wonderfully and now that the
bleeding had almost completely stopped, Mr. Duncan was much
stronger.

"Do you think you can get to the boat, if I help you?"  asked Tom.

"Yes, I believe so.  To think of meeting you again, and under such
circumstances!  It is providential."

"Did someone shoot you?"  inquired Tom, who could not get out of
his head the notion of the men who had once assaulted him.

"No, I shot myself," answered Mr. Duncan as he got to his feet
with Tom's help.  "I was out with my gun, practicing just as I was
that day when I met you in the woods.  I stooped down to crawl
under a bush and the weapon went off, the muzzle being close
against my arm.  I can't understand how it happened.  I fell down
and called for help.  Then I guess I must have fainted, but I came
to when I heard you talking to me.  I shouldn't have come out
to-day as it is so wet, but I had some new shot shells I wished to
try in order to test them before the hunting season.  But if I can
get to the sanitarium, I will be well taken care of.  I know one
of the doctors there."

With Tom leading him and acting as a sort of support, the journey
to the motor-boat was slowly made.  Making as comfortable a bed as
possible out of the seat cushions, Tom assisted Mr. Duncan to it,
and then starting the engine he sent his boat out from shore at
half speed, as the fog was still thick and he did not want to run
upon a rock.

"Do you know where the sanitarium is?"  asked the wounded hunter.

"About," answered Tom a little doubtfully, "but I'm afraid it's
going to be hard to locate it in this fog."

"There's a compass in my coat pocket," said Mr. Duncan.  "Take it
out and I'll tell you how to steer.  You ought to carry a compass
if you're going to be a sailor."

Tom was beginning to think so himself and wondered that he had not
thought of it before.  He found the one the hunter had, and
placing it on the seat near him, he carefully listened to the
wounded man's directions.  Tom easily comprehended and soon had
the boat headed in the proper direction.  After that it was
comparatively easy to keep on the right course, even in the fog.

But there was another danger, however, and this was that he might
run into another boat.  True, there were not many on Lake Carlopa,
but there were some, and one of the few motor-boats might be out
in spite of the bad weather.

"Guess I'll not run at full speed," decided Tom.  "I wouldn't like
to crash into the RED STREAK.  We'd both sink."

So he did not run his motor at the limit and sat at the steering-
wheel, peering ahead into the fog for the first sight of another
craft.

He turned to look at Mr. Duncan and was alarmed at the pallor of
his face.  The man's eyes were closed and he was breathing in a
peculiar manner.

"Mr. Duncan," cried Tom, "are you worse?"

There was no answer.  Leaving the helm for a moment, Tom bent over
the injured hunter.  A glance showed him what had happened.  The
tourniquet had slipped and the wound was bleeding again.  Tom
quickly shut off the motor, so that he might give his whole
attention to the work of tightening the handkerchief.  But
something seemed to be wrong.  No matter how tightly he twisted
the stick the blood did not stop flowing.  The lad was frightened.
In a short time the man would bleed to death.

"I've got to get him to the sanitarium in record time!"  exclaimed
Tom.  "Fog or no fog, I've got to run at full speed!  I've got to
chance it!"

Making the bandage as tight as he could and fastening it in place,
the young inventor sprang to the motor and set it in motion.  Then
he went to the wheel.  In a few minutes the ARROW was speeding
through the water as it had never done before, except when it had
raced the RED STREAK.  "If I hit anything--good-by!"  thought Tom
grimly.  His hands were tense on the rim of the steering-wheel and
he was ready in an instant to reverse the motor as he sat there
straining his eyes to see through the curtain of mist that hung
over the lake.  Now and then he glanced at the compass, to keep on
the right course, and from time to time he looked at Mr. Duncan.
The hunter was still unconscious.

How Tom accomplished that trip he hardly remembered afterward.
Through the fog he shot, expecting any moment to crash into some
other boat.  He did pass a rowing craft in which sat a lone
fisherman.  The lad was upon him in an instant, but a turn of the
wheel sent the ARROW safely past, and the startled fisherman,
whose frail craft was set to rocking violently by the swell from
the motor-boat, sent an objecting cry through the fog after Tom.
But the youth did not reply.  On and on he raced, getting the last
atom of power from his motor.

He feared Mr. Duncan would be dead when he arrived, but when he
saw the dock of the sanitarium looming up out of the mist and shut
off the power to slowly run up to it, he placed his hand on the
wounded man's heart and found it still beating.

"He's alive, anyhow," thought the youth, and then his craft bumped
up against the bulkhead and a man in the boathouse on the dock was
sent on the run for a physician.

Mr. Duncan was quickly taken up to the sanitarium on a stretcher
and Tom followed.

"You must have made a record run," observed one of the physicians
a little while afterward, when Tom was telling of his trip while
waiting in the office to hear the report on the hunter's
condition.

"I guess I did," muttered the young inventor "only I didn't think
so at the time.  It seemed as if we were only crawling along."


CHAPTER XII

SUSPICIOUS CHARACTERS

Under the skill of the physicians at the lake sanitarium Mr.
Duncan's wound was quickly attended to and the bleeding, which Tom
had partly checked, was completely stopped.  Some medicines having
been administered, the hunter regained a little of his strength,
and, about an hour after he had been brought to the resort, he was
able to see Tom, who, at his request, was admitted to his room.
The young inventor found Mr. Duncan propped up in bed, with his
injured arm bandaged.

"Is the injury a bad one?"  asked Tom, entering softly.

"Not as bad as I feared," replied the hunter, while a trained
nurse placed a chair for the lad at the bedside.  "If it had not
been for you, though, I'm afraid to think of what might have
happened."

"I am glad I chanced to be going past when you called," replied
the lad.

"Well, you can imagine how thankful I am," resumed Mr. Duncan.
"I'll thank you more properly at another time.  I hope I didn't
delay you on your trip."

"It's not of much consequence," responded the youth.  "I was only
going to see that everything was all right at our house," and he
explained about his father being at the hotel and mentioned his
worriment.  "I will go on now unless I can do something more for
you," resumed Tom.  "I will probably stay at our house all night
to-night instead of trying to get back to Sandport."

"I'd like to send word to my wife about what has happened," said
the hunter.  "If it would not be too much out of your way, I'd
appreciate it if you could stop at my home in Waterford and tell
her, so she will not be alarmed at my absence."

"I'll do it," replied our hero.  "There is no special need of my
hurrying.  I have brought your gun and compass up from the boat.
They are down in the office."

"Will you do me a favor?"  asked Mr. Duncan quickly.

"Of course."

"Then please accept that gun and compass with my compliments.
They are both of excellent make, and I don't think I shall use
that gun this season.  My wife would be superstitious about it.
As for the compass, you'll need one in this fog, and I can
recommend mine as being accurate."

"Oh, I couldn't think of taking them," expostulated Tom, but his
eyes sparkled in anticipation, for he had been wishing for a gun
such as Mr. Duncan owned.  He also needed a compass.

"If you don't take them I shall feel very much offended," the
hunter said, "and the nurse here will tell you that sick persons
ought to be humored.  Hadn't they?"  and he appealed to the pretty
young woman, who was smiling at Tom.

"That's perfectly true," she said, showing her white, even teeth.
"I think, Mr. Swift, I shall have to order you to take them."

"All right," agreed Tom, "only it's too much for what I did."

"It isn't half enough," remarked Mr. Duncan solemnly.  "Just
explain matters to my wife, if you will, and tell her the doctor
says I can be out in about a week.  But I'm not going hunting or
practicing shots again."

A little later Tom, with the compass before him to guide him on
his course through the fog, was speeding his boat toward
Waterford.  Now and then he glanced at the fine shotgun which he
had so unexpectedly acquired.

"This will come in dandy this fall!"  he exclaimed.  "I'll go
hunting quail and partridge as well as wild ducks.  This compass
is just what I need, too."

Mrs. Duncan was at first very much alarmed when Tom started to
tell her of the accident, but she soon calmed down as the lad went
more into details and stated how comparatively out of danger her
husband now was.  The hunter's wife insisted that Tom remain to
dinner, and as he had made up his mind he would have to devote two
days instead of one to the trip to his house, he consented.

The fog lifted that afternoon, and Tom, rejoicing in the sunlight,
which drove away the storm clouds, speeded up the ARROW until she
was skimming over the lake like a shaft from a bow.

"This is something like," he exclaimed.  "I'll soon be at home,
find everything all right and telephone to dad.  Then I'll sleep
in my own room and start back in the morning."

When Tom was within a few miles of his own boathouse he heard
behind him the "put-put"  of a motor craft.  Turning, he saw the
RED STREAK fairly flying along at some distance from him.

"Andy certainly is getting the speed out of her now," he remarked.
"He'd beat me if we were racing, but the trouble with his boat and
engine is that he can't always depend on it.  I guess he doesn't
understand how to run it.  I wonder if he'll offer to race now?"

But the red-haired owner of the auto boat evidently did not intend
to offer Tom a race.  The RED STREAK went on down the lake,
passing the ARROW about half a mile away.  Then the young inventor
saw that Andy had two other lads in the boat with him.

"Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey, I guess," he murmured.  "Well,
they're a trio pretty much alike.  The farther off they are the
better I like it."

Tom once more gave his attention to his own boat.  He was going at
a fair speed, but not the limit, and he counted on reaching home
in about a half hour.  Suddenly, when he was just congratulating
himself on the smooth-running qualities of his motor, which had
not missed an explosion, the machinery stopped.

"Hello!"  exclaimed the young inventor in some alarm.  "What's up
now?"

He quickly shut off the gasoline and went back to the motor.  Now
there are so many things that may happen to a gasoline engine that
it would be difficult to name them all offhand, and Tom, who had
not had very much experience, was at a loss to find what had
stopped his machinery.  He tried the spark and found that by
touching the wire to the top of the cylinder, when the proper
connection was, made, that he had a hot, "fat one."  The
compression seemed all right and the supply pipe from the gasoline
tank was in perfect order.  Still the motor would not go.  No
explosion resulted when he turned the flywheel over, not even
when he primed the cylinder by putting a little gasoline in
through the cocks on the cylinder heads.

"That's funny," he remarked to himself as he rested from his
labors and contemplated the "dead" motor.  "First time it has gone
back on me."  The boat was drifting down the lake, and, at the
sound of another motor craft approaching, Tom looked up.  He saw
the RED STREAK, containing Andy Foger and his cronies.  They had
observed the young inventor's plight.

"Want a tow?"  sneered Andy.

"What'll you take for your second-hand boat that won't run?"
asked Pete Bailey.

"Better get out of the way or you might be run down," added Sam
Snedecker.

Tom was too angry and chagrined to reply, and the RED STREAK swept
on.

"I'll make her go, if it takes all night!" declared Tom
energetically.  Once more he tried to start the motor.  It coughed
and sighed, as if in protest, but would not explode.  Then Tom
cried: "The spark plug!  That's where the trouble is, I'll wager.
Why didn't I think of it before?"

It was the work of but a minute to unscrew the spark plugs from
the tops of the cylinders.  He found that both had such
accumulations of carbon on them that no spark could ever have
reached the mixture of gasoline and air.

"I'll put new ones in," he decided, for he carried a few spare
plugs for emergencies.  Inside of five minutes, with the new plugs
in place, the motor was running better than before.

"Now for home!"  cried Tom, "and if I meet Andy Foger I'll race
him this time."

But the RED STREAK was not in sight, and, a little later, Tom had
run the ARROW into the boathouse, locked the door and was on his
way up to the mansion.

"I suppose Mrs. Baggert and Garret will be surprised to see me,"
he remarked.  "Maybe they'll think we don't trust them, by coming
back in this fashion to see that everything is safe.  But then, I
suppose, dad is naturally nervous about some of his valuable
machinery and inventions.  I think I'll find everything all right,
though."

As Tom went up the main path and swung off to a side one, which
was a short cut to the house, he saw in the dusk, for it was now
early evening, a movement in the bushes that lined the walk.

"Hello, Garret!"  exclaimed the lad, taking it for granted it was
the engineer employed by Mr. Swift.

There was no reply, and Tom, with a sudden suspicion, sprang
toward the bushes.  The shrubbery was more violently agitated and,
as the lad reached the screen of foliage, he saw a man spring up
from the ground and take to his heels.

"Here!  Who are you?  What do you want?"  yelled Tom.

Hardly had he spoken when from behind a big apple tree another man
sprung.  It was light enough so that the lad could see his face,
and a glimpse of it caused him to cry out:

"Happy Harry, the tramp!"

Before he could call again the two men had disappeared.


CHAPTER XIII

TOM IN DANGER

"Garret!  Garret Jackson!" cried Tom as he struggled through the
hedge of bushes and ran after the men.  "Where are you, Garret?
Come on and help me chase these men!"

But there came no answer to Tom's hail.  He could not hear the
sound of the retreating footsteps of the men now and concluded
that they had made their escape.  Still he would not give up, but
dashed on, slipping and stumbling, now and then colliding with a
tree.

"What can they be doing here?" thought Tom in great anxiety.  "Are
they after some more of dad's inventions because they didn't get
his turbine motor?"

"Hello!  Who's there?  Who are you?" called a voice suddenly.

"Oh, Garret!  Where have you been?" asked the young inventor,
recognizing the tones of his father's keeper.  "I've been calling
you.  Some of those scoundrels are around again!"

"Why if it isn't Tom!" ejaculated the engineer.  "However in the
world did you get here?  I thought you were at Sandport."

"I'll explain later, Garret.  Just now I want to catch those men,
if I can."

"Which men?"

"Happy Harry and another one.  I saw them hiding down by the
orchard path.  Come on, they're right ahead of us."

But though they hunted as well as they were able to in the fast-
gathering darkness, there was no trace of the intruders.  They had
to give up, and Tom, after going to the boathouse to see that the
ARROW was all right, returned to the house, where he told the
engineer and housekeeper what had brought him back and how he had
surprised the two men.

"Is everything all right, Garret?" he concluded.  "Dad is nervous
and frightened.  I must telephone him at the hotel to-night and
let him know, for I promised to come back.  I can't, though, until
to-morrow."

"Everything is all right as far as I know," answered Jackson.
"I've kept a careful watch and the burglar alarm has been in
working order.  Mrs. Baggert and I haven't been disturbed a single
night since you went away.  It's curious that the men should be
here the very night you come back.  Maybe they followed you."

"I hardly think so, for they didn't know I was coming."

"You can't tell what those fellows know," commented the engineer.
"But, anyhow, I don't suppose they could have gotten here from
Sandport as soon as you did."

"Oh, yes they could, in their automobile," declared Tom.  "But I
don't believe they knew I was coming.  They knew we were away,
however, and thought it would be a good time to steal something, I
guess.  Are you sure nothing has been taken?"

"Perfectly sure, but you and I will take a look around the shop."

They made a hasty examination, but found nothing disturbed and no
signs that anyone had tried to break in.

"I think I'll telephone dad that everything is all right," decided
Tom.  "It is as far as his inventions are concerned, and if I tell
about seeing the men it will only worry him.  I can explain that
part better when I see him.  But when I go back, Garret, you will
have to be on your guard, since those men are in the neighborhood."

"I will, Tom.  Don't worry."

Mr. Swift was soon informed by his son over the telephone that
nothing in the shops had been disturbed, and the inventor received
the news with evident satisfaction.  He requested Tom to come back
to the hotel in the morning, in order that the three of them might
go for a ride about the lake in the afternoon, and Tom decided to
make an early start.

The night passed without incident, though Tom, who kept the gun
Mr. Duncan had given him in readiness for use, got up several
times, thinking he heard suspicious noises.  After an early
breakfast, and having once more cautioned the engineer and
housekeeper to be on their guard, Tom started back in the ARROW.

As it would not be much out of his way, the young inventor decided
to cut across the lake and stop at the sanitarium, that he might
inquire about Mr. Duncan.  He thought he could speed the ARROW up
sufficiently to make up for any time he might lose, and, with this
in mind, he headed out toward the middle of Lake Carlopa.  The
engine was working splendidly with the new spark plugs, and Tom
was wondering if there was any possible method of getting more
revolutions out of the motor.  He had about come to the conclusion
that a new propeller might answer his purpose when he heard the
noise of an approaching boat.  He looked up quickly and exclaimed:

"Andy Foger again, and Pete and Sam are with him.  It's a wonder
he wouldn't go off on a trip instead of cruising around so near
home.  Guess he's afraid he'll get stuck."

Idly Tom watched the RED STREAK.  It was cutting through the water
at a fast rate, throwing up curling foam on either side of the
sharp bow.  "He seems to be heading this way," mused Tom.  "Well,
I'm not going to race with him to-day."

Nearer and nearer came the speedy craft, straight for the ARROW.
The young inventor shifted his helm in order to get out of Andy's
course, but to his surprise he saw that the red haired lad changed
the direction of his own boat.

"Guess he wants to see how close he can come to me," thought our
hero.  "Maybe he wants to show how fast he's going."

The RED STREAK was now so close that the features of the occupants
could easily be distinguished.  There were grins on the faces of
Andy and his cronies.

"Get out of the way or we'll run you down!" cried the bully.
"We've got the right of way."

"Don't you try anything like that!" shouted Tom in some alarm, not
that he was afraid of Andy, but the RED STREAK was getting
dangerously near, and he knew Andy was not a skillful helmsman.
The auto-boat was now headed directly at the ARROW and coming on
speedily.  Andy was bending over the wheel and Tom had begun to
turn his, in order to get well out of the way of the insolent,
squint-eyed lad and his friends.

Suddenly Andy uttered a cry and leaped up.

"Look out!  Look out!" he yelled.  "My steering gear has broken!
I can't change my course.  Look out!"

The RED STREAK was bearing right down on Tom's boat.

"Shut off your power!  Reverse!" shouted Tom.

Andy seemed confused and did not know what to do.  Sam Snedecker
sprang to the side of his crony, but he knew even less about a
motor-boat.  It looked as if Tom would be run down, and he was in
great danger.

But the young inventor did not lose his head.  He put his wheel
hard over and then, leaping to his motor, sent it full speed
forward.  Not a moment too soon had he acted, for an instant later
the other boat shot past the stern of the ARROW, hitting it a
severe but glancing blow.  Tom's boat quivered from end to end and
he quickly shut off the power.  By this time Andy had succeeded in
slowing down his craft.  The young inventor hastily looked over
the side of the ARROW.  One of the rudder fastenings had been torn
loose.

"What do you mean by running me down?" shouted Tom angrily.

"I--I didn't do it on purpose," returned Andy contritely.  "I was
seeing how near I could come to you when my steering gear broke.
I hope I haven't damaged you."

"My rudder's broken," went on Tom "and I've got to put back to
repair it.  I ought to have you arrested for this!"

"I'll pay for the damage," replied Andy, and he was so frightened
that he was white, in spite of his tan and freckles.

"That won't do me any good now," retorted Tom.  "It will delay me
a couple of hours.  If you try any tricks like that again, I'll
complain to the authorities and you won't be allowed to run a boat
on this lake."

Andy knew that his rival was in the right and did not reply.  The
bully and his cronies busied themselves over the broken steering
gear, and the young inventor, finding that he could make a shift
to get back to his boathouse, turned his craft around and headed
for there, in order to repair the damage.


CHAPTER XIV

THE ARROW DISAPPEARS

Paying no heed to the occupants of the bully's boat, who, by
reason of their daring, had been responsible for his accident that
might have resulted seriously, Tom was soon at his dock.  He had
it conveniently arranged for hoisting craft out of the water to
repair them, and in a few minutes the stern of the ARROW was
elevated so that he could get at the rudder.

"Well, it's not as bad as I thought," he remarked when, with
critical eye, he had noted the damage done.  "I can fix it in about
an hour if Garret helps me."

Going up to the house to get some tools and to tell the engineer
that he had returned, Tom looked out over the lake and saw Andy's
boat moving slowly off.

"They've got her fixed up in some kind of shape," he murmured.
"It's a shame for a chump like Andy to have a good boat like that.
He'll spoil it in one season.  He's getting altogether too
reckless.  First thing he knows, he and I will have a clash and
I'll pay back some of the old scores."

Mr. Jackson was much surprised to see the young inventor home
again so soon, as was also Mrs. Baggert.  Tom explained what had
happened, and he and the engineer went to work repairing the
damage done by the RED STREAK.  As the owner of the ARROW had
anticipated, the work did not take long, and, shortly before
dinner time, the boat was ready to resume the interrupted trip to
Sandport.

"Better stay and have lunch," urged Mrs. Baggert.  "You can hardly
get to the hotel by night, anyhow, and maybe it would be better
not to start until to-morrow."

"No, I must get back to-night or dad would be worried," declared
Tom.  "I've been gone longer now than I calculated on.  But I will
have dinner here, and, if necessary, I can do the last half of the
trip after dark.  I know the way now and I have a compass and a
good searchlight."

The ARROW was let down into the water again and tied outside the
boathouse ready for a quick start.  The dinner Mrs. Baggert
provided was so good that Tom lingered over it longer than he
meant to, and he asked for a second apple dumpling with hard sauce
on.  So it was with a very comfortable feeling indeed and with an
almost forgiving spirit toward Andy Foger that our hero started
down the path to the lake.

"Now for a quick run to Sandport," he said aloud.  "I hope I
shan't see any more of those men and that dad hasn't been bothered
by them.  His suspicions about the house weren't altogether
unfounded, for I did see the tramp and some one else sneaking
around, but I don't believe they'll come back now."

Tom swung around the path that led to the dock.  As he came in
sight of the water, he stared as if he could not believe what he
saw, or, rather, what he did not see.  For there was no craft tied
to the string-piece, where he had fastened his motor-boat.  He
looked again, rubbed his eyes to make sure and then cried out:

"The ARROW is gone!"

There was no doubt of it.  The craft was not at the dock.
Breaking into a run, Tom hastened to the boathouse.  The ARROW was
not in there, and a look across the lake showed only a few
rowboats in sight.

"That's mighty funny," mused the youth.  "I wonder--"

He paused suddenly in his thoughts.

"Maybe Garret took it out to try and see that it worked all
right," he said hopefully.  "He knows how to run a boat.  Maybe he
wanted to see how the rudder behaved and is out in it now.  He got
through dinner before I did.  But I should have thought he'd have
said something to me if he was going out in it."

This was the one weak point in Tom's theory, and he felt it at
once.

"I'll see if Garret is in his shop," he went on as he turned back
toward the house.

The first person he met as he headed for the group of small
structures where Mr. Swift's inventive work was carried on was
Garret Jackson, the engineer.

"I--I thought you were out in my boat!" stammered Tom.

"Your boat!  Why would I be out in your boat?" and Mr. Jackson
removed his pipe from his mouth and stared at the young inventor.

"Because it's gone!"

"Gone!" repeated the engineer, and then Tom told him.  The two
hurried down to the dock, but the addition of another pair of eyes
was of no assistance in locating the ARROW.  The trim little motor
craft was nowhere to be seen.

"I can't understand it," said Tom helplessly.  "I wasn't gone more
than an hour at dinner, and yet--"

"It doesn't take long to steal a motor-boat," commented the
engineer.

"But I think I would have heard them start it," went on the lad.
"Maybe it drifted off, though I'm sure I tied it securely."

"No, there's not much likelihood of that.  There's no wind to-day
and no currents in the lake.  But it could easily have been towed
off by some one in a rowboat and then you would not have heard the
motor start."

"That's so," agreed the youth.  "That's probably how they did it.
They sneaked up here in a rowboat and towed the ARROW off.  I'm
sure of it."

"And I'll wager I know who did it," exclaimed Mr. Jackson
energetically.

"Who?" demanded Tom quickly.

"Those men who were sneaking around--Happy Harry and his gang.
They stole the boat once and they'd do it again.  Those men took
your boat, Tom."

The young inventor shook his head.

"No," he answered, "I don't believe they did."

"Why not?"

"Well, because they wouldn't dare come back here when they knew
we're on the lookout for them.  It would be too risky."

"Oh, those fellows don't care for risk," was the opinion of Mr.
Jackson.  "Take my word for it, they have your boat.  They have
been keeping watch, and as soon as they saw the dock unprotected
they sneaked up and stole the ARROW."

"I don't think so," repeated Mr. Swift's son.

"Who do you think took it then?"

"Andy Foger!" was the quick response.  "I believe he and his
cronies did it to annoy me.  They have been trying to get even
with me-or at least Andy has--for outbidding him on this boat.
He's tried several times, but he hasn't succeeded--until now.
I'm sure Andy Foger has my boat," and Tom, with a grim tightening
of his lips, swung around as though to start in instant pursuit.

"Where are you going?" asked Mr. Jackson.

"To find Andy and his cronies.  When I locate them I'll make them
tell me where my boat is."

"Hadn't you better send some word to your father?  You can hardly
get to Sandport now, and he'll be worried about you."

"That's so, I will.  I'll telephone dad that the boat--no, I'll
not do that either, for he'd only worry and maybe get sick.  I'll
just tell him I've had a little accident, that Andy ran into me
and that I can't come back to the hotel for a day or two.  Maybe
I'll be lucky to find my boat in that time.  But dad won't worry
then, and, when I see him, I can explain.  That's what I'll do,"
and Tom was soon talking to Mr. Swift by telephone.

The inventor was very sorry his son could not come back to rejoin
him and Ned, but there was no help for it, and, with as cheerful
voice as he could assume, the lad promised to start for Sandport
at the earliest opportunity.

"Now to find Andy and my boat!" Tom exclaimed as he hung up the
telephone receiver.


CHAPTER XV

A DISMAYING STATEMENT

Trouble is sometimes good in a way; it makes a person resourceful.
Tom Swift had had his share of annoyances of late, but they had
served a purpose.  He had learned to think clearly and quickly.
Now, when he found his boat stolen, he at once began to map out
a plan of action.

"What will you do first?" asked Mr. Jackson as he saw his
employer's son hesitating.

"First I'm going to Andy Foger's house," declared the young
inventor.  "If he's home I'm going to tell him what I think of
him.  If he's not, I'm going to find him."

"Why don't you take your sailboat and run down to his dock?"
suggested the engineer.  "It isn't as quick as your motor-boat,
but it's better than walking."

"So it is," exclaimed the lad.  "I will use my catboat.  I had
forgotten all about it of late.  I'm glad you spoke."

He was soon sailing down the lake in the direction of the
boathouse on the waterfront of Mr. Foger's property.  It needed
but a glance around the dock to show him that the RED STREAK was
not there, but Tom recollected the accident to the steering gear
and thought perhaps Andy had taken his boat to some wharf where
there was a repair shop and there left it to return home himself.
But inquiry of Mrs. Foger, who was as nice a woman as her son was
a mean lad, gave Tom the information that his enemy was not at
home.

"He telephoned to me that his boat was damaged," said Mrs. Foger
gently, "and that he had taken it to get fixed.  Then, he said, he
and some friends were going on a little cruise and might not be
back to-night."

"Did he say where he was going?" asked our hero, who did not tell
Andy's mother why he wanted to see her son.

"No, and I'm worried about him.  Sometimes I think Andy is too--
well, too impetuous, and I'm afraid he will get into trouble."

Tom, in spite of his trouble, could hardly forbear smiling.
Andy's mother was totally unaware of the mean traits of her son
and thought him a very fine chap.  Tom was not going to undeceive
her.

"I'm afraid something will happen to him," she went on.  "Do you
think there is any danger being out on the lake in a motor-boat,
Mr. Swift?  I understand you have one."

"Yes, I have one," answered Tom.  He was going to say he had once
had one, but thought better of it.  "No, there is very little
danger this time of year," he added.

"I am very glad to hear you say so," went on Mrs. Foger with a
sigh.  "I shall feel more at ease when Andy is away now.  When he
returns home, I shall tell him you called upon him and he will
return your visit.  I am glad to see that the custom of paying
calls has not died out among the present generation.  It is a
pleasant habit, and I am glad to have my son conform to it.  He
shall return your kind visit."

"Oh, no, it's of no consequence," replied Tom quickly, thinking
grimly that his visit was far from a friendly one.  "There is no
need to tell your son I was here.  I will probably see him in a
day or two.

"Oh, but I shall tell him," insisted Mrs. Foger with a kind smile.
"I'm sure he will appreciate your call."

There was much doubt concerning this in the mind of the young
inventor, but he did not express it and soon took his leave.  Up
and down the lake for the rest of the day he cruised, looking in
vain for a sight of Andy Foger in the RED STREAK, but the racing
boat appeared to be well hidden.

"If I only could find where they've taken mine," mused Tom.  "Hang
it all, this is rotten luck!" and for the first time he began to
feel discouraged.

"Maybe you'd better notify the police," suggested Mr. Jackson when
Tom returned to the Swift house that night.  "They might help
locate it."

"I think I can do as well as the police," answered the youth.  "If
the boat is anywhere it's on the lake, and the police have no
craft in which to make a search."

"That's so," agreed the engineer.  "I wish I could help you, but I
don't believe it would be wise for me to leave the house,
especially since those men have been about lately."

"No, you must stay here," was Tom's opinion.  "I'll take another
day or two to search.  By this time Andy and his gang will return,
I'm sure, and I can tackle them."

"Suppose they don't?"

"Well, then I'll make a tour of the lake in my sailboat and I'll
run up to Sandport and tell dad, for he will wonder what's keeping
me.  I'll know better next time than to leave my boat at the dock
without taking out the connection at the spark coil, so no one can
start the motor.  I should have done that at first, but you always
think of those things afterward."

The lad began his search again the next morning and cruised about
in little bays and gulfs looking for a sight of the RED STREAK or
the ARROW, but he saw neither, and a call at Andy's house showed
that the red-haired youth had not returned.  Mrs. Foger was quite
nervous over her son's continued absence, but Mr. Foger thought it
was all right.

Another day passed without any results and the young inventor was
getting so nervous, partly with worrying over the loss of his boat
and partly on his father's account, that he did not know what to
do.

"I can't stand it any longer," he announced to Mrs. Baggert the
night of the third day, after a telephone message had been
received from Mr. Swift.  The inventor wanted to know why his son
did not return to the hotel to join him and Ned.  "Well, what will
you do?" asked the housekeeper.

"If I don't find my boat to-morrow, I'll sail to Sandport, bring
home dad and Ned and we three will go all over the lake.  My boat
must be on it somewhere, but Lake Carlopa is so cut up that it
could easily be hidden."

"It's queer that the Foger boy doesn't come home.  That makes it
look as if he was guilty."

"Oh, I'm sure he took it all right," returned Tom.  "All I want is
to see him.  It certainly is queer that he stays away as long as
he does.  Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey are with him, too.  But
they'll have to return some time."

Tom dreamed that night of finding his boat and that it was a
wreck.  He awoke, glad to find that the latter part was not true,
but wishing that some of his night vision might come to pass
during the day.

He started out right after breakfast, and, as usual, headed for
the Foger home.  He almost disliked to ask Mrs. Foger if her son
had yet returned, for Andy's mother was so polite and so anxious
to know whether any danger threatened that Tom hardly knew how to
answer her.  But he was saved that embarrassment on this occasion,
for as he was going up the walk from the lake to the residence he
met the gardener and from him learned that Andy had not yet come
back.

"But his mother had a message from him, I did hear," went on the
man.  "He's on his way.  It seems he had some trouble."

"Trouble.  What kind of trouble?" asked Tom.

"I don't rightly know, sir, but," and here the gardener winked his
eye, "Master Andy isn't particular what kind of trouble he gets
into."

"That's right," agreed our hero, and as he went down again to
where he had left his boat he thought: "Nor what kind of trouble
he gets other people into.  I wish I had hold of him for about
five minutes!"

The sailboat swung slowly from the dock and heeled over to the
gentle breeze.  Hardly knowing what to do, Tom headed for the
middle of the lake.  He was discouraged and tired of making plans
only to have them fail.

As he looked across the stretch of water he saw a boat coming
toward him.  He shaded his eyes with his hand to see better, and
then, with a pair of marine glasses, took an observation.  He
uttered an exclamation.

"That's the RED STREAK as sure as I'm alive!" he cried.  "But
what's the matter with her?  They're rowing!"

The lad headed his boat toward the approaching one.  There was no
doubt about it.  It was Andy Foger's craft, but it was not
speeding forward under the power of the motor.  Slowly and
laborious the occupants were pulling it along, and as it was not
meant to be rowed, progress was very slow.

"They've had a breakdown," thought Tom. "Serves 'em right!  Now
wait till I tackle 'em and find out where my boat is.  I've a good
notion to have Andy Foger arrested!"

The sailing craft swiftly approached the motor-boat.  Tom could see
the three occupants looking at him, apprehensively as well as
curiously, he thought.

"Guess they didn't think I'd keep after 'em," mused the young
inventor, and a little later he was beside the RED STREAK.

"Well," cried Tom angrily, "it's about time you came back!"

"We've had a breakdown," remarked Andy, and he seemed quite
humiliated.  He was beginning to find out that he didn't know as
much about a motor-boat as he thought he did.

"I've been waiting for you," went on Tom.

"Waiting for us?  What for?" asked Sam Snedecker.

"What for?  As if you didn't know!" blurted out the owner of the
ARROW.  "I want my boat, Andy Foger, the one you stole from me and
hid!  Tell me where it is at once or I'll have you arrested!"

"Your boat!" repeated the bully, and there was no mistaking the
surprise in his tones.

"Yes, my boat!  Don't try to bluff me like that."

"I'm not trying to bluff you.  We've been away, three days and
just got back."

"Yes, I know you have.  You took my boat with you, too."

"Are you crazy?" demanded Pete Bailey.

"No, but you fellows must have been to think you could take my
boat and me not know it," and Tom, filled with wrath, grasped the
gunwale of the RED STREAK as if he feared it would suddenly shoot
away.

"Look here!" burst out Andy, and he spoke sincerely, "we didn't
touch your boat.  Did we, fellows?"

"No!" exclaimed Sam and Pete at once, and they were very much in
earnest.

"We didn't even know it was stolen, did we?" went on Andy.

"No," agreed his chums.  Tom looked unconvinced.

"We haven't taken your boat and we can prove it," continued the
bully.  "I know you and I have had quarrels, but I'm telling you
the truth, Tom Swift.  I never touched your boat."

There was no mistaking the sincerity of Andy.  He was not a
skilful deceiver, and Tom, looking into his squint-eyes, which
were opened unusually wide, could not but help believing the
fellow.

"We haven't seen it since the day we had the collision," added
Andy, and his chums confirmed this statement.

"We went off on a little cruise," continued the red-haired bully,
"and broke down several times.  We had bad luck.  Just as we were
nearing home something went wrong with the engine again.  I never
saw such a poor motor.  But we never took your boat, Tom Swift,
and we can prove it."

Tom was in despair.  He had been so sure that Andy was the thief,
that to believe otherwise was difficult.  Yet he felt that he
must.  He looked at the disabled motor of the RED STREAK and
viewed it with the interested and expert eye of a machinist, no
matter if the owner of it was his enemy.  Then suddenly a
brilliant idea came into Tom's head.


CHAPTER XVI

STILL ON THE SEARCH

"You seem to have lots of trouble with your boat, Andy," said Tom
after a few moments of rather embarrassed silence.

"I do," admitted the owner of the RED STREAK.  "I've had bad luck
ever since I got it, but usually I've been able to fix it by
looking in the book.  This time I can't find out what the trouble
is, nor can any of the fellows.  It stopped when we were out in
the middle of the lake and we had to row.  I'm sick of motor
boating."

"Suppose I fix it for you?" went on Tom.

"If you do, I'll pay you well."

"I wouldn't do it for pay--not the kind you mean," continued the
young inventor.

"What do you mean then?" and Andy's face, that had lighted up,
became glum again.

"Well, if I fix your boat for you, will you let me run it a little
while?"

"You mean show me how to run it?"

"No, I mean take it myself.  Look here, Andy, my boat's been
stolen, and I thought you took it to get even with me.  You say
you didn't--"

"And I didn't touch it," interposed the squint-eyed lad quickly.

"All right, I believe you.  But somebody stole it, and I think I
know who."

"Who?" asked Sam Snedecker.

"Well, you wouldn't know if I told you, but I suspect some men
with whom I had trouble before," and Tom referred to Happy Harry
and his gang.  "I think they have my boat on this lake, and I'd
like to get another speedy craft to cruise about it and make a
further search.  How about it, Andy?  If I fix your boat, will you
let me take it to look for my boat?"

"Sure thing!" agreed the bully quickly, and his voice for once was
friendly toward Tom.  "Fix the engine so it will run, and you can
use the RED STREAK as long as you like."

"Oh, I probably wouldn't want it very long.  I could cover the
lake in about three days, and I hope by that time I could locate
the thieves.  Is it a bargain?"

"Sure," agreed Andy again, and Tom got into the motor-boat to look
at the engine.  He found that it would require some time to adjust
it properly and that it would be necessary to take the motor
apart.

"I think I'd better tow you to my dock," the young inventor said
to Andy.  "I can use some tools from the shop then, and by
to-night I'll have the RED STREAK in running order."

The breeze was in the right quarter, fortunately, and with the
motor-boat dragging behind, the ARROW's owner put the nose of the
sailing craft toward his home dock.

When Tom reached his house he found that Mrs. Baggert had received
another telephone message from Mr. Swift, inquiring why his son
had not returned to Sandport.

"He says if you don't come back by to-morrow," repeated the
housekeeper, "that he'll come home by train.  He's getting
anxious, I believe."

"Shouldn't wonder," admitted Tom.  "But I want him to stay there.
The change will do him good.  I'll soon have my boat back, now
that I can go about the lake swiftly, and then I'll join him.
I'll tell him to be patient."

Tom talked with his father at some length, assuring him that
everything was well at the Shopton house and promising to soon be
with him.  Then the young inventor began work on the motor of the
RED STREAK.  He found it quite a job and had to call on Mr.
Jackson to help him, for one of the pistons had to be repaired and
a number of adjustments made to the cylinders.

But that night the motor was fully mended and placed back in the
boat.  It was in better shape than it had been since Andy had
purchased the craft.

"There," remarked Tom, "now I'm ready to hunt for those
scoundrels.  Will you leave your boat at my dock to-night, Andy?"

"Yes, so you can start out early in the morning.  I'm not going."

"Why not?" demanded Tom quickly.

"Well--er--you see I've had enough of motoring for a while,"
explained Andy.  "Besides, I don't believe my mother would like me
to go out on a chase after thieves.  If we had to shoot I might
hit one of them, and--"

"Oh, I see," answered Tom.  "But I don't like to take your boat
alone.  Besides, I don't fancy there will be much shooting.  I
know I'm not going to take a gun.  In fact, the one Mr. Duncan
gave me is in the boat.  All I want is to get the ARROW back."

"That's all right," went on Andy.  "You take my boat and use it as
long as you like.  I'll rest up a few days.  When you find your
boat you can bring mine back."

Tom understood.  He was just as glad not to have Andy accompany
him in the chase, as he and the red-haired lad had never been good
friends and probably never would be.  So it would cause some
embarrassment to be together in a boat all day.  Then again Tom
knew he could manage the RED STREAK better alone, but, of course,
he did not want to mention this when he asked for the loan of the
craft.  Andy's own suggestion, however, had solved the difficulty.
Tom had an idea that Andy felt a little timid about going in
pursuit of the thieves, but naturally it would not do to mention
this, for the squint-eyed lad considered himself quite a fighter.

Early the next morning, alone in the RED STREAK, Tom continued the
search for his stolen boat.  He started out from his home dock and
mapped out a course that would take him well around the lake.

"I s'pose I could take a run to Sandport now," mused the youth as
he shot in and out of the little bays, keeping watch for the
ARROW.  "But if I do dad will have to be told all about it, and,
he'll worry.  Then, too, he might want to accompany me, and I
think I can manage this better alone, for the RED STREAK will run
faster with only one in.  I ought to wind up this search in two
days, if my boat is still on the lake.  And if those scoundrels
have sunk her I'll make them pay for it."

On shot the speedy motor-boat, in and out along the winding
shoreline, with the lad in the bow at the steering-wheel peering
with eager eyes into every nook and corner where his craft might
be hidden.


CHAPTER XVII

"THERE SHE IS!"

Anticipating that he would be some time on his search, the young
inventor had gone prepared for it.  He had a supply of provisions
and he had told Mrs. Baggert he might not be back that night.  But
he did not intend to sleep aboard the RED STREAK, which, being a
racing boat, was not large enough to afford much room for
passengers.  Tom had planned, therefore, to put up at some hotel
near the lake in case his hunt should last beyond one night.

That it would do this was almost certain, for all that morning he
searched unavailingly for the ARROW.  A distant mill whistle
sounding over Lake Carlopa told him it was noon.

"Dinner time," he announced to himself.  "Guess I'll run up along
shore in the shade and eat."

Selecting a place where the trees overhung the water, forming a
quiet, cool nook, Tom sent the boat in there, and, tying it to a
leaning tree, he began his simple meal.  Various thoughts filled
his mind, but chief among them was the desire to overtake the
thieves who had his boat.  That it was Happy Harry's gang he was
positive.

The lad nearly finished eating and was considering what direction
he might best search in next when he heard, running along a road
that bordered the lake, an automobile.

"Wonder who that is?" mused Tom.  "It won't do any harm to take a
look, for it might be some of those thieves again.  They probably
still have their auto or Happy Harry couldn't have gotten from
Sandport to Shopton so quickly."

The young inventor slipped ashore from the motor-boat, taking care
to make no noise.  Stealing silently along toward the road, he
peered through the underbrush for a sight of the machine, which
seemed to be going slowly.  But before the youth had a glimpse of
it he was made aware who the occupant was by hearing someone
exclaim:

"Bless my shoe laces if this cantankerous contraption isn't going
wrong again!  I wonder if it's going to have a fit here in this
lonely place.  It acts just as if it was.  Bless my very
existence! Hold on now.  Be nice!  Be nice!"

"Mr. Damon!" exclaimed Tom, and, without knowing it, he had spoken
aloud.

"Hold on there!  Hold on!  Who's calling me in this forsaken
locality?  Bless my shirt studs!  But who is it?" and the
eccentric man who had sold Tom the motor-cycle looked intently at
the bushes.

"Here I am, Mr. Damon," answered the lad, stepping out into the
road.  "I knew it was you as soon as I saw you."

"Bless my liver, but that's very true!  I suppose you heard my
unfortunate automobile puffing along.  I declare I don't know what
ails it.  I got it on the advice of my physician, who said I must
get out in the air, but, bless my gears, it's the auto who needs a
doctor more than I do!  It's continually out of order.  Something
is going to happen right away.  I can tell by the way it's
behaving."

Mr. Damon had thrown out the clutch, but the engine was still
running, though in a jerky, uncertain fashion, which indicated to
the trained ear of the young inventor that something was wrong.

"Perhaps I can fix it for you as I did before," ventured Tom.

"Bless my eyebrows!  Perhaps you can," cried the eccentric man
hopefully.  "You always seem to turn up at the right moment.  How
do you manage it?"

"I don't know.  I remember the time you turned up just when I
wanted you to help me capture Happy Harry and his gang, and now,
by, a strange coincidence, I'm after them again."

"You don't say so!  My good gracious!  Bless my hatband!  But
that's odd.  There!" he ejaculated suddenly as the automobile
engine stopped with a choking sigh, "I knew something was going to
happen."

"Let me take a look," proposed the lad, and he was soon busy
peering into the interior of the machine.  At first he could not
find the trouble, but being a persistent youth, Tom went at it
systematically and located it in two places.  The clutch was not
rightly adjusted and the carburetor float feed needed fixing.  The
young inventor was not long in making the slight repairs and then
he assured Mr. Damon that his automobile would run properly.

"Bless my very existence, but what a thing it is to have a head
for mechanics!" exclaimed the odd man gratefully.  "Now it would
bother me to adjust a nutmeg grater if it got out of order, but I
dare say you could fix it in no time."

"Yes," answered Tom, "I could and so could you, for there's
nothing about it to fix.  But you can go ahead now if you wish."

"Thank you.  It just shows how ignorant I am of machinery.  I
presume something will go wrong in another mile or two.  But may I
ask what you are doing here?  I presume you are in your motor-
boat, sailing about for pleasure.  And didn't I understand you to
say you were after those chaps again?  Bless my watch charm, but I
was so interested in my machine that I didn't think to ask you."

"Yes, I am after those thieves again."

"In your motor-boat, I presume.  Well, I hope you catch them.
What have they stolen now?"

"My motor-boat.  That's why I'm after them, but I had to borrow a
craft to chase them with."

"Bless my soul!  You don't tell me!  How did it happen?"

Thereupon the lad related as much of the story as was necessary to
put Mr. Damon in possession of the facts and he ended up with:

"I don't suppose you have seen anything of the men in my boat,
have you?"

Mr. Damon seemed strangely excited.  He had entered his auto, but
as the lad's story progressed the odd gentleman had descended.
When Tom finished he exclaimed:

"Don't say a word now--not a word.  I want to think, and that is
a process, which, for me, requires a little time.  Don't speak a
word now.  Bless my left hand, but I think I can help you!"

He frowned, stamped first one foot, then the other, looked up at
the sky, as if seeking inspiration there, and then down at the
ground, as if that would help him to think.  Then he clapped his
hands smartly together and cried out:

"Bless my shoe buttons!"

"Have you seen them?" asked Tom eagerly.

"Was your boat one with a red arrow painted on the bow?" asked Mr.
Damon in turn.

"It was!" and the lad was now almost as excited as was his friend.

"Then I've seen it and, what's more, this morning!  Bless my spark
plug, I've seen it!"

"Tell me about it!" pleaded the young inventor, and Mr. Damon,
calming himself after an effort, resumed:

"I was out for an early spin in my auto," he said, "and was
traveling along a road that bordered the lake, about fifteen miles
above here.  I heard a motor-boat puffing along near shore, and,
looking through the trees, I saw one containing three men.  It had
a red arrow on the bow, and that's why I noticed it, because I
recalled that your boat was named the DART."

"ARROW," corrected Tom.

"The ARROW.  Oh, yes, I knew it was something like that.  Well of
course at the time I didn't think that it was your boat, but I
associated it in my mind with yours.  Do you catch my meaning?"

Tom did and said so, wishing Mr. Damon would hurry and get to the
point.  But the eccentric character had to do things in his own
way.

"Exactly," he resumed. "Well, I didn't think that was your boat,
but, at the same time, I watched the men out of curiosity, and I
was struck with their behavior. They seemed to be quarreling,
and, from what I could hear, two of them seemed to be
remonstrating with the third one for having taken some sort of a
piece of wood from the forward compartment. I believe that is
the proper term."

"Yes!" Tom almost shouted.  "But where did they go?  What became
of them?  What was the man doing to the forward compartment--where
the gasoline tank is?"

"Exactly.  I was trying to think what was kept there.  That's it,
the gasoline tank.  Well, the boat kept on up the lake, and I
don't know what became of the men.  But about that piece of wood.
It seems that one of the men removed a block, from under the tank
and the others objected.  That's why they were quarreling."

"That's very strange," exclaimed the lad.  "There must be some
mystery about my boat that I don't understand.  But that will keep
until I get the boat itself.  Good-by, Mr. Damon.  I must be off."

"Where to?"

"Up the lake after those thieves.  I must lose no time," and Tom
started to go back to where he had left the RED STREAK.

"Hold on!" cried Mr. Damon.  "I have something to propose, Tom.
Two heads are better than one, even if one doesn't know how to
adjust a nutmeg grate.  Suppose I come along with you?  I can
point out the direction the men took, at any rate."

"I'll be very glad to have you," answered the lad, who felt that
he might need help if there were three of the thieves in his
craft.  "But what will you do with your automobile?"

"I'll just run it down the road a way to where a friend of mine
has a stable.  I'll leave it in there and join you.  Will you let
me come?  Bless my eye glasses, but I'd like to help catch those
scoundrels!"

"I'll be very glad to have you.  Go ahead, put the auto in the
barn and I'll wait for you."

"I have a better plan than that," replied Mr. Damon.  "Run your
boat down to that point," and he indicated one about a mile up the
lake.  "I'll be there waiting for you, and we'll lose no time.  I
can cover the ground faster in my auto than you can in your boat."

Tom saw the advantage of this and was soon under way, while he
heard on shore the puffing of his friend's car.  On the trip to
the point Tom puzzled over the strange actions of the man in
taking one of the braces from under the gasoline tank.

"I'll wager he did it before," thought the lad.  "It must be the
same person who was tampering with the lock of the forward
compartment the day I bought the boat.  But why--that's the
question--why?"

He could find no answer to this, puzzle over it as he did, and he
gave it up.  His whole desire now was to get on the trail of the
thieves, and he had strong hopes, after the clew Mr. Damon had
given him.  The latter was waiting for him on the point, and so
nimble was the owner of the auto, in spite of his size, that Tom
was not delayed more than the fraction of a minute ere he was
under way again, speeding up the lake.

"Now keep well in toward shore," advised Mr. Damon.  "Those
fellows don't want to be observed any more than they can help, and
they'll sneak along the bank, They were headed in that direction,"
and he pointed it out.  "Now I hope you won't think I'm in the
way.  Besides, you know, if you get your boat back, you'll want
some one to help steer it, while you run this one.  I can do that,
at all events, bless my very existence!"

"I am very glad of your help," replied the lad, but he did not
take his eyes from the water before him, and he was looking for a
sight of his boat with the men in it.

For three hours or more Tom and Mr. Damon cruised in and out along
the shore of the lake, going farther and farther up the body of
water.  Tom was beginning to think that he would reach Sandport
without catching sight of the thieves, and he was wondering if,
after all, he might not better stop off and see his father when,
above the puffing of the motor in the RED STREAK, he heard the
put-put of another boat.

"Listen!" cried Mr. Damon, who had heard it at the same time.

Tom nodded.

"They're just ahead of us," whispered his companion.

"If it's them," was the lad's reply.

"Speed up and we'll soon see," suggested Mr. Damon, and Tom
shoved the timer over.  The RED STREAK forged ahead.  The sound of
the other boat came more plainly now.  It was beyond a little
point of land.  The young inventor steered out to get around it
and leaned eagerly forward to catch the first glimpse of the
unseen craft.  Would it prove to be the ARROW?

The put-put became louder now.  Mr. Damon was standing up, as if
that would, in some mysterious way, help.  Then suddenly the other
boat came into view.  Tom saw it in an instant and knew it for the
ARROW.

"There she is!" he cried.


CHAPTER XVIII

THE PURSUIT

For an instant after Tom's exultant cry the men in the boat ahead
were not aware that they were being pursued.  Then, as the
explosions from the motor of the RED STREAK sounded over the
water, they turned to see who was coming up behind them.  There
was no mistaking the attitude of the young inventor and his
companion.  They were leaning eagerly forward, as if they could
reach out and grasp the criminals who were fleeing before them.

"Put on all the speed you can, Tom!" begged Mr. Damon.  "We'll
catch the scoundrels now.  Speed up the motor!  Oh, if I only had
my automobile now.  Bless my crank shaft, but one can go so much
faster on land than on water."

The lad did not reply, but thought, with grim humor, that running
an automobile over Lake Carlopa would be no small feat.  Mr.
Damon, however, knew what he was saying.

"We'll catch them!  We'll nab 'em!" he cried.  "Speed her up,
Tom."

The youth was doing his best with the motor of the RED STREAK.  He
was not as well acquainted with it as he was with the one in his
boat, but he knew, even better than Andy Foger, how to make it do
efficient work.  It was a foregone conclusion that the RED STREAK,
if rightly handled, could beat the ARROW, but there were several
points in favor of the thieves.  The motor of Tom's boat was in
perfect order, and even an amateur, with some knowledge of a boat,
could make it do nearly its best.  On the other hand, the RED
STREAK's machinery needed "nursing."  Again, the thieves had a
good start, and that counted for much.  But Tom counted on two
other points.  One was that Happy Harry and his gang would
probably know little about the fine points of a motor.  They had
shown this in letting the motor of the boat they had first stolen
get out of order, and Tom knew the ins and outs of a gasoline
engine to perfection.  So the chase was not so hopeless as it
seemed.

"Do you think you can catch them?" asked Mr. Damon anxiously.

"I'm going to make a big try," answered his companion.

"They're heading out into the middle of the lake!" cried the
eccentric man.

"If they do, I can cut them off!" murmured Tom as he put the wheel
over.

But whoever was steering the ARROW knew better than to send it on
a course that would enable the pursuing boat to cut across and
shorten the distance to it.  After sending the stolen craft far
enough out from shore to clear points of land that jutted out into
the lake, the leading boat was sent straight ahead.

"A stern chase and a long chase!" murmured Mr. Damon.  "Bless my
rudder, but those fellows are not going to give up easily."

"I guess not," murmured Tom.  "Will you steer for a while, Mr.
Damon?"

"Of course I will.  If I could get out and pull the boat after me,
to make it go faster, I would.  But as I always lose my breath
when I run, perhaps it's just as well that I stay in here."  Tom
thought so too, but his attention was soon given to the engine.
He adjusted the timer to get if possible a little more speed out
of the boat he had borrowed from Andy, and he paid particular
attention to the oiling system.

"We're going a bit faster!" called Mr. Damon' encouragingly, "or
else they're slacking up."

Tom peered ahead to see if this was so.  It was hard to judge
whether he was overhauling the ARROW, as it was a stern chase, and
that is always difficult to judge.  But a glimpse along shore
showed him that they were slipping through the water at a faster
speed.

"They're up to something!" suddenly exclaimed Mr. Damon a moment
later.  "I believe they're going to fire on us, Tom.  They are
pointing something this way."

The lad stood up and gazed earnestly at his boat, which seemed to
be slipping away from him so fast.  One of the occupants was in
the stern, aiming some glittering object at those in the RED
STREAK.  For a moment Tom thought it might be a gun.  Then, as the
man turned, he saw what it was.

"A pair of marine glasses," cried the lad.  "They're trying to
make out who we are."

"I guess they know well enough," rejoined Mr. Damon.  "Can't you
go any faster, Tom?"

"I'm afraid not.  But we'll land them, sooner or later.  They
can't go very far in this direction without running ashore and
we'll have them.  They're cutting across the lake now."

"They may escape us if it gets dark.  Probably that's what they're
working for.  They want to keep ahead of us until nightfall."

The young inventor thought of this too, but there was little he
could do.  The motor was running at top speed.  It could be made
to go faster, Tom knew, with another ignition system, but that was
out of the question now.

The man with the glasses had resumed his seat, and the efforts of
the trio seemed concentrated on the motor of the ARROW.  They,
too, wished to go faster.  But they had not skill enough to
accomplish it, and in about ten minutes, when Tom took another
long and careful look to ascertain if possible whether or not he
was overhauling the thieves, he was delighted to see that the
distance between the boats had lessened.

"We're catching them!  We're creeping up on them!" cried Mr.
Damon.  "Keep it up, Tom."  There was nothing to do, however, save
wait.  The boat ahead had shifted her course somewhat and was now
turning in toward the shore, for the lake was narrow at this
point, and abandoning their evident intention of keeping straight
up the lake, the thieves seemed now bent on something else.

"I believe they're going to run ashore and get out!" cried Mr.
Damon.

"If they do, it's just what I want," declared the lad.  "I don't
care for the men.  I want my boat back!"

The occupants of the ARROW were looking to the rear again, and
one--Happy Harry, Tom thought--shook his fist.

"Ah, wait until I get hold of you!" cried Mr. Damon, following his
example.  "I'll make you wish you'd behaved yourselves, you
scoundrels!  Bless my overcoat!  Catch them if you can, Tom."

There was now no doubt of the intention of the fleeing ones.  The
shore was looming up ahead and straight for it was headed the
ARROW.  Tom sent Andy's boat in the same direction.  He was
rapidly overhauling the escaping ones now, for they had slowed
down the motor.  Three minutes later the foremost boat grated on
the beach of the lake.  The men leaped out, one of them pausing an
instant in the bow.

"Here, don't you damage my boat!" cried Tom involuntarily, for the
man seemed to be hammering something.

The fellow leaped over the side, holding something in his hand.

"There they go!  Catch them!" yelled Mr. Damon.

"Let them go!" answered the lad as the men ran toward the wood.
"I want my boat.  I'm afraid they've damaged her.  One of them
tore something from the bow."

At the same instant the two companions of the fellow who had
paused in the forward part of the ARROW saw that he had something
in his hand.  With yells of rage they dashed at him, but he,
shaking his fist at them, plunged into the bushes and could be
heard breaking his way through, while his companions were in
pursuit.

"They've quarreled among themselves," commented Mr. Damon as high
and angry voices could be heard from the woods.  "There's some
mystery here, Tom."

"I don't doubt it, but my first concern is for my boat.  I want to
see if they have damaged her."

Tom had run so closely in shore with the RED STREAK that he had to
reverse to avoid damaging the craft against the bank.  In a mass
of foam he stopped her in time, and then springing ashore, he
hurried to his motor-boat.


CHAPTER XIX

A QUIET CRUISE

"Have they done any damage?" asked Mr. Damon as he stood in the
bow of the RED STREAK.

Tom did not answer for a moment.  His trained eye was looking over
the engine.

"They yanked out the high tension wire instead of stopping the
motor with the switch," he answered at length, and then, when he
had taken a look into the compartment where the gasoline tank was,
he added: "And they've ripped out two more of the braces I put in.
Why in the world they did that I can't imagine."

"That's evidently what one man had that the others wanted," was
Mr. Damon's opinion.

"Probably," agreed Tom.  "But what could he or they want with
wooden braces?"

That was a puzzler for Mr. Damon, but he answered:

"Perhaps they wanted to damage your boat and those two men were
mad because the other got ahead of them."

"Taking out the braces wouldn't do much damage.  I can easily put
others in.  All it would do would be to cause the tank to sag down
and maybe cause a leak in the pipe.  But that would be a queer
thing to do.  No, I think there's some mystery that I haven't
gotten to the bottom of yet.  But I'm going to."

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Damon.  "I'll help you.  But can you run
your boat back home?"

"Not without fixing it a bit.  I must brace up that tank and put
in a new high-tension wire from the spark coil.  I can do it here,
but I'd rather take it to the shop.  Besides, with two boats to
run back, for I must return Andy's to him, I don't see how I can
do it very well unless you operate one, Mr. Damon."

"Excuse me, but I can't do it.  Bless my slippers, but I would be
sure to run on a rock!  The best plan will be for you to tow your
boat and I'll ride in it and steer.  I can do that much, anyhow.
You can ride in the RED STREAK."

Tom agreed that this would be a good plan.  So, after temporarily
bracing up the tank in the ARROW, it was shoved out into the lake
and attached to Andy's craft.

"But aren't you going to make a search for those men?" asked Mr.
Damon when Tom was ready to start back.

"No, I think it would be useless.  They are well away by this
time, and I don't fancy chasing them through the woods, especially
as night is coming on.  Besides, I won't leave these boats."

"No doubt you are right, but I would like to see them punished,
and I am curious enough to wish to know what object that scoundrel
could have in ripping out the blocks that served as a brace for
the tank."

"I feel the same way myself," commented the lad, "especially since
this is the second time that's happened.  But we'll have to wait,
I guess."

A little later the start back was made, Mr. Damon steering the
ARROW skillfully enough so that it did not drag on the leading
boat, in which Tom rode.  His course took him not far from the
lake sanitarium, where Mr. Duncan, the hunter, had been brought,
and desiring to know how the wounded man was getting on, the youth
proposed that they make a halt, explaining to Mr. Damon his
reason.

"Yes, and while you're about it you'd better telephone your father
that you will join him to-morrow," suggested the other.  "I know
what it is to fret and worry.  You can fix your boat up in time to
go to Sandport to-morrow, can't you?"

"Yes, I'm glad you reminded me of it.  I'll telephone from the
sanitarium, if they'll let me."

Mr. Duncan was not at the institution, Tom was told, his injury
having healed sufficiently to allow of his being removed to his
home.  The youth readily secured permission to use the telephone,
and was soon in communication with Mr. Swift.  While not telling
him all the occurrences that had delayed him, Tom gave his father
and Ned Newton enough information to explain his absence.  Then
the trip to Shopton was resumed in the two boats.

"What are you going to do about your automobile?" asked Tom as
they neared the point where the machine had been left.

"Never mind about that," replied Mr. Damon.  "It will do it good
to have a night's vacation.  I will go on to your house with you,
and perhaps I can get a train back to my friend's home, so that I
can claim my car."

"Won't you stay all night with me?" invited the young inventor.
"I'd be glad to have you."

Mr. Damon agreed, and, Tom putting more speed on the RED STREAK,
was soon opposite his own dock.  The ARROW was run in the
boathouse and the owner hastily told Mrs. Baggert and the engineer
what had occurred.  Then he took Andy's boat to Mr. Foger's dock
and warmly thanked the red-haired lad for the use of his craft.

"Did you find your boat?" asked Andy eagerly.  "How did the RED
STREAK run?"

"I got my boat and yours runs fine," explained Tom.

"Good!  I'll race you again some day," declared Andy.

Mr. Damon enjoyed his visit at our hero's house, for Mrs. Baggert
cooked one of her best suppers for him.  Tom and the engineer
spent the evening repairing the motor-boat, Mr. Damon looking on
and exclaiming "Bless my shoe leather" or some other part of his
dress or anatomy at every stage of the work.  The engineer wanted
to know all about the men and their doings, but he could supply no
reason for their queer actions regarding the braces under the
gasoline tank.

In the morning Tom once more prepared for an early start for
Sandport, and Mr. Damon, reconsidering his plans, rode as far with
him as the place where the automobile had been left.  There he
took leave of the young inventor, promising to call on Mr. Swift
in the near future.

"I hope you arrive at the hotel where your father is without any
more accidents," remarked the automobilist.  "Bless my very
existence, but you seem to have the most remarkable series of
adventures I ever heard of!"

"They are rather odd," admitted Tom.  "I don't know that I
particularly care for them, either.  But, now that I have my boat
back, I guess everything will be all right."

But Tom could not look ahead.  He was destined to have still more
exciting times, as presently will be related.

Without further incident he arrived at the Lakeview Hotel in
Sandport that evening and found his father and Ned very glad to
see him.  Of course he had to explain everything then, and, with
his son safely in his sight, Mr. Swift was not so nervous over the
recital as he would have been had Tom not been present.

"Now for some nice, quiet trips," remarked the lad when he had
finished his account.  "I feel as if I had cheated you out of part
of your vacation, Ned, staying away as long as I did."

"Well, of course we missed you," answered his chum.  "But your
father and I had a good time."

"Yes, and I invented a new attachment for a kitchen boiler," added
Mr. Swift.  "I had a chance for it when I passed through the hotel
kitchen one day, for I wanted to see what kind of a range they
used."

"I guess there's no stopping you from inventing," replied his son
with a laugh and a hopeless shake of the head.  "But don't let it
happen again when you go away to rest."

"Oh, I only just thought of it," said Mr. Swift.  "I haven't
worked the details out yet."

Then he wanted to know about everything at home and he seemed
particularly anxious lest the Happy Harry gang do some damage.

"I don't believe they will," Tom assured him.  "Garret and Mrs.
Baggert will be on guard."

The next few days were pleasant ones for Tom, his father and Ned
Newton.  They cruised about the lake, went fishing and camped in
the woods.  Even Mr. Swift spent one night in the tent and said he
liked it very much.  For a week the three led an ideal existence,
going about as they pleased, Ned taking a number of photographs
with his new camera.  The ARROW proved herself a fine boat, and
Tom and Ned, when Mr. Swift did not accompany them, explored the
seldom visited parts of Lake Carlopa.

The three had been out one day and were discussing the necessity
of returning home soon when Ned spoke.

"I shall hate to give up this life and go to slaving in the bank
again," he complained.  "I wish I was an inventor."

"Oh, we inventors don't have such an easy time," said Mr. Swift.
"You never know when trouble is coming," and he little imagined
how near the truth he was.

A little later they were at the hotel dock.  When Tom had tied up
his boat the three walked up the path to the broad veranda that
faced the lake.  A boy in uniform met them.

"Some one has just called you on the telephone, Mr. Swift," he
reported.

"Some one wants me?  Who is it?"

"I think he said his name is Jackson, sir, Garret Jackson, and he
says the message is very important."

"Tom, something has happened at home!" exclaimed the inventor as
he hurried up the steps.  "I'm afraid there's bad news."

Unable to still the fear in his heart, Tom followed his father.


CHAPTER XX

NEWS OF A ROBBERY

With a hand that trembled so he could scarcely hold the receiver
of the telephone, Mr. Swift placed it to his ear.

"Hello! Hello!" he cried into the transmitter.  "Yes, this is Mr.
Swift--yes, Garret.  What is it?"

Then came a series of clicks, which Tom and Ned listened to.  The
inventor spoke again.

"What's that?  The same men?  Broke in early this evening?  Oh,
that's too bad!  Of course, I'll come at once."

There followed more meaningless clicks, which Tom wished he could
translate.  His father hung up the receiver, turned to him and
exclaimed:

"I've been robbed again!"

"Robbed again!  How, dad?"

"By that same rascally gang, Garret thinks.  This evening, when he
and Mrs. Baggert were in the house the burglar alarm went off.
The indicator showed that the electrical shop had been entered,
and the engineer hurried there.  He saw a light inside and the
shadows of persons on the windows.  Before he could reach the
shop, however, the thieves heard him coming and escaped.  Oh, Tom,
I should never have come away!"

"But did they take anything, dad?  Perhaps Garret frightened them
away before they had a chance to steal any of your things.  Did
you ask him that?"

"I didn't need to.  He said he made a hasty exanimation before he
called me up, and he is sure a number of my electrical inventions
are missing.  Some of them are devices I never have had patented,
and if I lose them I will have no recovery."

"But just what ones are they?  Perhaps we can send out a police
alarm to-night."

"Garret couldn't tell that," answered Mr. Swift as he paced to and
fro in the hotel office.  "He doesn't know all the tools and
machinery I had in there.  But it is certain that some of my most
valuable things have been taken."

"Never mind.  Don't worry, dad," and Tom tried to speak
soothingly, for he saw that his father was much excited.  "We may
be able to get them back.  How does Garret know the same men who
stole the turbine model broke in the shop this evening?"

"He saw them.  One was Happy Harry, he is positive.  The others he
did not know, but he recognized the tramp from our description of
him."

"Then we must tell the police at once."

"Yes, Tom, I wish you would telephone.  I'll give you a
description of the things.  No, I can't do that either, for I
don't know what was stolen.  I must go home at once to find out.
It's a good thing the motor-boat is here.  Come, let's start at
once.  What is my bill here?" and the inventor turned to the hotel
proprietor, who had come into the office.  "I have suffered a
severe loss and must leave at once."

"I am very sorry, sir.  I'll have it ready for you in a few
minutes."

"All right.  Tom, is your boat ready for a quick trip?"

"Yes, dad, but I don't like to make it at night with three in.  Of
course it might be perfectly safe, but there's a risk, and I don't
like to take it."

"Don't worry about the risk on my account, Tom.  I'm not afraid.
I must get home and see of what I have been robbed."

The young inventor was in a quandary.  He wanted to do as his
father requested and to aid him all he could, yet he knew that an
all-night trip in the boat down the lake would be dangerous, not
only from the chance of running on an unknown shore or into a
hidden rock, but because Mr. Swift was not physically fitted to
stand the journey.

"Come, Tom," exclaimed the aged inventor impatiently, "we must
start at once!"

"Won't morning do as well, dad?"

"No, I must start now.  I could not sleep worrying over what has
happened.  We will start--"

At that instant there came a low, rumbling peal of thunder.  Mr.
Swift started and peered from a window.  There came a flash of
lightning and another vibrant report from the storm-charged
clouds.

"There is your bill, Mr. Swift," remarked the proprietor, coming
up, "but I would not advise you to start to-night.  There is a bad
storm in the west, and it will reach here in a few minutes.
Storms on Lake Carlopa, especially at this open and exposed end,
are not to be despised, I assure you."

"But I must get home!" insisted Tom's father.

The lace curtain over the window blew almost straight out with a
sudden breeze, and a flash of lightning so bright that it
reflected even in the room where the incandescent electrics were
glowing made several others jump.  Then came a mighty crash, and
with that the flood-gates of the storm were opened, and the rain
came down in torrents.  Tom actually breathed a sigh of relief.
The problem was solved for him.  It would be impossible to start
to-night, and he was glad of it, much as he wanted to get on the
trail of the thieves.

There was a scurrying on the part of the hotel attendants to close
the windows, and the guests who had been enjoying the air out on
the porches came running in.  With a rush, a roar and a muttering,
as peal after peal of thunder sounded, the deluge continued.

"It's a good thing we didn't start," observed Ned.

"I should say so," agreed Tom.  "But we'll get off the first thing
in the morning, dad."

Mr. Swift did not reply, but his nervous pacing to and fro in the
hotel office showed how anxious he was to be at home again.  There
was no help for it, however, and, after a time, finding that to
think of reaching his house that night was out of the question,
the inventor calmed down somewhat,

The storm continued nearly all night, as Tom could bear witness,
for he did not sleep well, nor did his father.  And when he came
down to breakfast in the morning Mr. Swift plainly showed the
effects of the bad news.  His face was haggard and drawn and his
eyes smarted and burned from lack of sleep.

"Well, Tom, we must start early," he said nervously.  "I am glad
it has cleared off.  Is the boat all ready?"

"Yes, and it's a good thing it was under shelter last night or
we'd have to bail it out now, and that would delay us."

An hour later they were under way, having telephoned to the
engineer at the Swift home that they were coming.  Garret Jackson
reported over the wire that he had notified the Shopton police of
the robbery, but that little could be done until the inventor
arrived to give a description of the stolen articles.

"And that will do little good, I fear," remarked Tom.  "Those
fellows have evidently been planning this for some time and will
cover their tracks well.  I'd like to catch them, not only to
recover your things, dad, but to find out the mystery of my boat
and why the man took the tank braces."


CHAPTER XXI

THE BALLOON ON FIRE

Down Lake Carlopa speeded the ARROW, those on board watching the
banks slip past as the motor-boat rapidly cut through the water.

"What time do you think we ought to reach home, Tom?" asked Mr.
Swift.

"Oh, about four o'clock, if we don't stop for lunch."

"Then we'll not stop," decided the inventor.  "We'll eat what we
have on board.  I suppose you have some rations?" and he smiled,
the first time since hearing the bad news.

"Oh, yes, Ned and I didn't eat everything on our camping trips,"
and Tom was glad to note that the fine weather which followed the
storm was having a good effect on his father.

"We certainly had a good time," remarked Ned.  "I don't know when
I've enjoyed a vacation so."

"It's too bad it had to be cut short by this robbery," commented
Mr. Swift.

"Oh, well, my time would be up in a few days more," went on the
young bank employee.  "It's just as well to start back now."

Tom took the shortest route he knew, keeping in as close to shore
as he dared, for now he was as anxious to get home as was his
father.  On and on speeded the ARROW, yet fast as it was, it
seemed slow to Mr. Swift, who, like all nervous persons, always
wanted to go wherever he desired to go instantly.

Tom headed his boat around a little point of land, and was urging
the engine to the top notch of speed, for now he was on a clear
course, with no danger from shoals or hidden rocks, when he saw,
darting out from shore, a tiny craft which somehow seemed familiar
to him.  He recognized a peculiar put-putter of the motor.

"That's the DOT," he remarked in a low voice to Ned, "Miss
Nestor's cousin's boat."

"Is she in it now?" asked Ned.

"Yes," answered Tom quickly.

"You've got good eyesight," remarked Ned dryly, "to tell a girl at
that distance.  It looks to me like a boy."

"No, it's Mary--I mean Miss Nestor," the youth quickly corrected
himself, and a close observer would have noticed that he blushed a
bit under his coat of tan.

Ned laughed, Tom blushed still more, and Mr. Swift, who was in a
stern seat, glanced up quickly.

"It looks as if that boat wanted to hail us," the inventor
remarked.

Tom was thinking the same thing, for, though he had changed his
course slightly since sighting the DOT, the little craft was put
over so as to meet him.  Wondering what Miss Nestor could want,
but being only too willing to have a chat with her, the young
inventor shifted his helm.  In a short time the two craft were
within hailing distance.

"How do you do?" called Miss Nestor, as she slowed down her motor.
"Don't you think I'm improving, Mr. Swift?"

"What's that?  I--er--I beg your pardon, but I didn't catch
that," exclaimed the aged inventor quickly, coming out of a sort
of day-dream.  "I beg your pardon."  He thought she had addressed
him.

Miss Nestor blushed and looked questioningly at Tom.

"My father," he explained as he introduced his parent.  Ned needed
none, having met Miss Nestor before.  "Indeed you have improved
very much," went on our hero.  "You seem able to manage the boat
all alone."

"Yes, I'm doing pretty well.  Dick lets me take the DOT whenever I
want to, and I thought I'd come out for a little trial run this
morning.  I'm getting ready for the races.  I suppose you are
going to enter them?" and she steered her boat alongside Tom's,
who throttled down his powerful motor so as not to pass his
friend.

"Races?  I hadn't heard of them," he replied.

"Oh, indeed there are to be fine ones under the auspices of the
Lanton Motor Club.  Mr. Hastings, of whom you bought that boat, is
going to enter his new CARLOPA, and Dick has entered the DOT, in
the baby class of course.  But I'm going to run it, and that's why
I'm practicing."

"I hope you win," remarked Tom.  "I hadn't heard of the races, but
I think I'll enter.  I'm glad you told me.  Do you want to race
now?" and he laughed as he looked into the brown eyes of Mary
Nestor.

"No, indeed, unless you give me a start of several miles."

They kept together for some little time longer, and then, as Tom
knew his father would be restless at the slow speed, he told Miss
Nestor the need of haste, and, advancing his timer, he soon left
the DOT behind.  The girl called a laughing good-by and urged him
not to forget the races, which were to take place in about two
weeks.

"I suppose Andy Foger will enter his boat," commented Ned.

"Naturally," agreed Tom.  "It's a racer, and he'll probably think
it can beat anything on the lake.  But if he doesn't manage his
motor differently, it won't."

The distance from Sandport to Shopton had been more than half
covered at noon, when the travelers ate a lunch in the boat.  Mr.
Swift was looking anxiously ahead to catch the first glimpse of
his dock and Tom was adjusting the machinery as finely as he dared
to get out of it the maximum speed.

Ned Newton, who happened to be gazing aloft, wondering at the
perfect beauty of the blue sky after the storm, uttered a sudden
exclamation.  Then he arose and pointed at some object in the air.

"Look!" he cried, "A balloon!  It must have gone up from some
fair."

Tom and his father looked upward.  High in the air, almost over
their heads, was an immense balloon.  It was of the hot-air
variety, such as performers use in which to make ascensions from
fair grounds and circuses, and below it dangled a trapeze, upon
which could be observed a man, only he looked more like a doll
than a human being.

"I shouldn't like to be as high as that," remarked Ned.

"I would," answered Tom as he slowed down the engine the better to
watch the balloon.  "I'd like to go up in an airship, and I intend
to some day."

"I believe he's going to jump!" suddenly exclaimed Ned after a few
minutes.  "He's going to do something, anyhow."

"Probably come down in a parachute," said Tom.  "They generally do
that."

"No!  No!" cried Ned.  "He isn't going to jump.  Something has
happened!  The balloon is on fire!  He'll be burned to death!"

Horror stricken, they all gazed aloft.  From the mouth of the
balloon there shot a tongue of fire, and it was followed by a
cloud of black smoke.  The big bag was getting smaller and seemed
to be descending, while the man on the trapeze was hanging
downward by his hands to get as far as possible away from the
terrible heat.


CHAPTER XXII

THE RESCUE

"Jump!  Jump!" cried Mr. Swift, leaping to his feet and motioning
to the man on the trapeze of the balloon.  But it is doubtful
whether or not the performer heard him.  Certainly he could not
see the frantic motions of the inventor.  "Why doesn't he jump?"
Mr. Swift went on piteously to the two lads.  "He'll surely be
burned to death if he hangs on there!"

"It's too far to leap!" exclaimed Tom.  "He's a good way up in the
air, though it looks like only a short distance.  He would be
killed if he dropped now."

"He ought to have a parachute," added Ned.  "Most of those men do
when they go up in a balloon.  Why doesn't he come down in that?
I wonder how the balloon took fire?"

"Maybe he hasn't a parachute," suggested Tom, while he slowed down
the motor-boat still more so as to remain very nearly under the
blazing balloon.

"Yes, he has!" cried Ned.  "See, it's hanging to one side of the
big bag.  He ought to cut loose.  He could save himself then.  Why
doesn't he?"

The balloon was slowly twisting about, gradually settling to the
surface of the lake, but all the while the flames were becoming
fiercer and the black clouds of smoke increased in size.

"There, see the parachute!" went on Ned.

The twisting of the bag had brought into view the parachute or
big, umbrella-shaped bag, which would have enabled the man to
safely drop to the surface of the lake.  Without it he would have
hit the water with such force that he would have been killed as
surely as if he had struck the solid earth.  But the boys and Mr.
Swift also saw something else, and this was that the balloon was
on fire on the same side where the parachute was suspended.

"Look! Look!" shouted Tom, bringing his boat to a stop.  "That's
why he can't jump!  He can't reach the parachute!"

By this time the balloon had settled so low that the actions of
the man could be plainly seen. That he was in great agony of
fear, as well as in great pain from the terrific heat over his
head was evident. He shifted about on the trapeze bar, now
hanging by one hand, so as to bring his body a little farther
below the blazing end of the bag, then, when one arm tired, he
would hang by the other. If the balloon would only come down
more quickly it would get to within such a short distance of the
water that the man could safely make the drop. But the immense
canvas bag was settling so slowly, for it was still very
buoyant, that considerable time must elapse before it would be
near enough to the water to make it safe for the unfortunate man
to let go the trapeze.

"Oh, if we could only do something!" cried Tom.  "We have to
remain here helpless and watch him burn to death.  It's awful!"

The three in the boat continued to gaze upward.  They could see
the man making frantic efforts to reach his parachute from time to
time.  Once, as a little current of air blew the flames and smoke
to one side, he thought he had a chance.  Up on the trapeze bar he
pulled himself and then edged along it in an endeavor to grasp the
ring of the parachute.  Once he almost had hold of that and also
the cord, which ran to a knife blade.  This cord, being pulled,
would sever the rope that bound it to the balloon, and he would be
comparatively safe, so he might drop to the lake.  But, just as he
was about to grasp the ring and cord the smoke came swirling down
on him and the hungry flames seemed to put out their fiery tongues
to devour him.  He had to slide back and once more hung by his
hands.

"I thought he was saved then," whispered Tom, and even the whisper
sounded loud in the silence.

Several men came running along the shore of the lake now.  They
saw the occupants in the ARROW and cried out:

"Why don't you save him?  Go to his rescue!"

"What can we do?" asked Ned quietly of his two friends, but he did
not trouble to answer the men on shore, who probably did not know
what they were saying.

The motor-boat had drifted from a spot under the unfortunate
balloonist, and at a word from his father the young inventor
started the engine and steered the craft back directly under the
blazing bag again.

"If he does drop, perhaps we may be able to pick him up," said Mr.
Swift.  "I wish we could save him!"

A cry from Ned startled Tom and his father, and their eyes, that
had momentarily been directed away from the burning bag high in
the air, were again turned toward it.

"The balloon is falling apart!" exclaimed Ned.  "It's all up with
him now!"

Indeed it did seem so, for pieces of the burning canvas, blazing
and smoking, were falling in a shower from the part of the bag
already consumed, and the fiery particles were fairly raining down
on the man.  But he still had his wits about him, though his
perilous position was enough to make any one lose his mind, and he
swung from side to side on the bar, shifting skillfully with his
hands and dodging the larger particles of blazing canvas.  When
some small sparks fell on his clothing he beat them out with one
hand, while with the other he clung to the trapeze.

There was scarcely any wind or the man's plight might have been
more bearable, for the current of air would have carried the smoke
and fire to one side.  As it was, most of the smoke and flames
went straight up, save now and then, when a draught created by the
heat would swirl the black clouds down on the performer, hiding
him from sight for a second or two.  A breeze would have carried
the sparks away instead of letting them fall on him.

Nearer and nearer to the surface of the lake sank the balloon.  By
this time the crowd on the bank had increased and there were
excited opinions as to what was best to do.  But the trouble was
that little could be done.  If the man could hold out until he got
near enough to the water to let go he might yet be saved, but this
would not be for some time at the present rate the balloon was
falling.  The performer realized this, and, as the fire was
getting hotter, he made another desperate attempt to reach the
parachute.  It was unavailing and he had to drop back, hanging
below the slender bar.

Suddenly there came a puff of wind, fanning the faces of those in
the motor-boat, and they looked intently to observe if there was
any current as high as was the balloonist.  They saw the big bag
sway to one side and the flames broke out more fiercely as they
caught the draught.  The balloon moved slowly down the lake.

"Keep after it, Tom!" urged his father.  "We may be able to save
him!"

The lad increased the speed of his engine and Ned, who was at the
wheel, gave it a little twist.  Then, with a suddenness that was
startling, the blazing canvas airship began to settle swiftly
toward the water.  It had lost much of its buoyancy.

"Now he can jump!  He's near enough to the water now!" cried Tom.

But a new danger arose.  True, the balloon was rapidly approaching
the surface of the lake and in a few seconds more would be within
such a short distance that a leap would not be fatal.  But the
burning bag was coming straight down and scarcely would the man be
in the water ere the fiery canvas mass would be on top of him.

In such an event he would either be burned to death or so held
down that drowning must quickly follow.

"If there was only wind enough to carry the balloon beyond him
after he jumped he could do it safely!" cried Ned.

Tom said nothing.  He was measuring, with, his eye, the distance
the balloon had yet to go and also the distance away the motor-
boat was from where it would probably land.

"He can do it!" exclaimed the young inventor.

"How?" asked his father.

For answer Tom caught up a newspaper he had purchased at the hotel
that morning.  Rolling it quickly into a cone, so that it formed a
rough megaphone, he put the smaller end to his mouth, and,
pointing the larger opening at the balloonist, he called out:

"Drop into the lake!  We'll pick you up before the bag falls on
you!  Jump!  Let go now!"

The balloonist heard and understood.  So did Ned and Mr. Swift.
Tom's quick wit had found a way to save the man.

Faster and faster the blazing bag settled toward the surface of
the water.  It was now merely a mushroom-shaped piece of burning
and smoking canvas, yet it was supporting the man almost as a
parachute would have done.

With one look upward to the burning mass above him and a glance
downward to the lake, the aeronaut let go his hold.  Like a shot
he came down, holding his body rigid and straight as a stick, for
he knew how to fall into water, did that balloonist.

Tom Swift was ready for him.  No sooner had the lad called his
directions through the megaphone than the young inventor had
speeded up his engine to the top notch.

"Steer so as to pick him up!" Tom cried to Ned, who was at the
wheel.  "Pass by him on a curve, and, as soon as I grab him, put
the wheel over so as to get out from under the balloon."

It was a risky thing to do, but our hero had it all planned out.
He made a loop of the boat's painter, and, hurrying to the bow,
leaned over as far as he could, holding the rope in readiness.
His idea was to have the balloonist grab the strands and be pulled
out of danger by the speedy motor-boat, for the blazing canvas
would cover such an extent of water that the man could not have
swum out of the danger zone in time.

Down shot the balloonist and down more slowly settled the
collapsed bag, yet not so slowly that there was any time to spare.
It needed only a few seconds to drop over the performer, to burn
and smother him.

Into the water splashed the man, disappearing from sight as when a
stick is dropped in, point first.  Ned was alert and steered the
boat to the side in which the man's face was, for he concluded
that the aeronaut would strike out in that direction when he came
up.  The ARROW was now directly under the blazing balloon and
cries of fear from the watchers on shore urged upon Tom and his
companions the danger of their position.  But they had to take
some risk to rescue the man.

"There he is!" cried Mr. Swift, who was on the watch, leaning over
the side of the boat.  Tom and Ned saw him at the same instant.
Ned shifted his wheel and the young inventor bent over, holding
out the rope for the man to grasp.  He saw it and struck out
toward the ARROW.  But there was no need for him to go far.  An
instant more and the speeding motor-boat shot past him.  He
grabbed the rope and Tom, aided by Mr. Swift, began to lift him
out of the water.

"Quick!  To one side, Ned!" yelled Tom, for the heat of the
descending mass of burning canvas struck him like a furnace blast.

Ned needed no urging.  With a swirl of the screw the ARROW shot
herself out of the way, carrying the aeronaut with her.  A moment
later the burning balloon, or what there was left of it, settled
down into the lake, hissing angrily as the fire was quenched by
the water and completely covering the spot where, but a few
seconds before, the man had been swimming.  He had been saved in
the nick of time.


CHAPTER XXIII

PLANS FOR AN AIRSHIP

"Slow her down, Ned!" cried Tom, for the ARROW was shooting so
swiftly through the water that the young inventor found it
impossible to pull up the balloonist.  Ned hurried back to the
motor, and, when the boat's way had been checked, it was an easy
matter to pull the dripping and almost exhausted man into the
craft.

"Are you much hurt?" asked Mr. Swift anxiously, for Tom was too
much out of breath with his exertion to ask any questions.  For
that matter the man was in almost as bad a plight.  He was
breathing heavily, as one who had run a long race.

"I--I guess I'm all right," he panted.  "Only burned a little on
my hands.  That--that was a close call!"

The boat swung around and headed for shore, on which was quite a
throng of persons.  Some of them had cheered when they saw the
plucky rescue.

"I'm afraid we can't save your balloon," gasped Tom as he looked
at the place where the canvas was still floating and burning.

"No matter.  It wasn't worth much.  That's the last time I'll ever
go up in a hot-air balloon," said the man with more energy than he
had before exhibited.  "I'm done with 'em.  I've had my lesson.
Hereafter an aeroplane or a gas balloon for me.  I only did this
to oblige the fair committee.  I'll not do it again."

The man spoke in short, crisp sentences, as though he was in too
much of a hurry to waste his words.

"Let it sink," he went on.  "It's no good.  Glad to see the last
of it."

Almost as he spoke, with a final hiss and a cloud of steam that
mingled with the black smoke, the remains of the big bag sunk
beneath the surface of the lake.

"We must get you ashore at once and to a doctor," said Mr. Swift.
"You must be badly burned."

"Not much.  Only my hands, where some burning pieces of canvas
fell on' em.  If I had a little oil to put on I'd be all right."

"I can fix you up better than that," put in Tom.  "I have some
Vaseline."

"Good!  Just the thing.  Pass it over," and the man, though he
spoke shortly, seemed grateful for the offer.  "My name's Sharp,"
he went on, "John Sharp, of no place in particular, for I travel
all over.  I'm a professional balloonist.  Ha!  That's the stuff!"

This last was in reference to a bottle of Vaseline, which Tom
produced.  Mr. Sharp spread some over the backs of his hands and
went on:

"That's better.  Much obliged.  I can't begin to thank you for
what you did for me--saved my life.  I thought it was all up with
me--would have been but for you.  Mustn't mind my manner--it's a
way I have--have to talk quick when you're balloonin'--no time--
but I'm grateful all the same.  Who might you people be?"

Tom told him their names and Mr. Swift asked the aeronaut if he
was sure he didn't need the services of a physician.

"No doctor for me," answered the balloonist.  "I've been in lots
of tight places, but this was the worst squeeze.  If you'll put me
ashore, I guess I can manage now."

"But you're all wet," objected Tom.  "Where will you go?  You need
some other clothes," for the man wore a suit of tights and
spangles.

"Oh, I'm used to this," went on the performer.  "I frequently have
to fall in the water.  I always carry a little money with me so as
to get back to the place where I started from.  By the way, where
am I?"

"Opposite Daleton," answered Tom.  "Where did you go up from?"

"Pratonia.  Big fair there.  I was one of the features."

"Then you're about fifteen miles away," commented Mr. Swift.  "You
can hardly get back before night.  Must you go there?"

"Left my clothes there.  Also a valuable gas balloon.  No more
hot-air ones for me.  Guess I'd better go back," and the aeronaut
continued to speak in his quick, jerky sentences.

"We'd be very glad to have you come with us, Mr. Sharp," went on
the inventor.  "We are not far from Shopton, and if you would like
to remain over night I'm sure we would make you comfortable.  You
can proceed to Pratonia in the morning."

"Thanks.  Might not be a bad idea," said Mr. Sharp.  "I'm obliged
to you.  I've got to go there to collect my money, though I
suppose they won't give it all to me."

"Why not?" demanded Ned.

"Didn't drop from my parachute.  Couldn't.  Fire was one reason--
couldn't reach the parachute, and if I could have, guess it
wouldn't have been safe.  Parachute probably was burned too.  But
I'm done with hot-air balloons though I guess I said that before."

The boys were much interested in the somewhat odd performer,
and, on his part, he seemed to take quite a notion to Tom, who
told him of several things that he had invented. "Well,"
remarked Mr. Swift after a while, during which the boat had been
moving slowly down the lake, "if we are not to go ashore for a
doctor for you, Mr. Sharp, suppose we put on more speed and get
to my home? I'm anxious about a robbery that occurred there,"
and he related some facts in the case.

"Speed her up!" exclaimed Mr. Sharp.  "Wish I could help you catch
the scoundrels, but afraid I can't--hands too sore," and he
looked at his burns.  Then he told how he had made the ascension
from the Pratonia fair grounds and how, when he was high in the
air, he had discovered that the balloon was on fire.  He described
his sensations and told how he thought his time had surely come.
Sparks from the hot air used to inflate it probably caused the
blaze, he said.

"I've made a number of trips," he concluded, "hot air and gas
bags, but this was the worst ever.  It got on my nerves for a few
minutes," he added coolly.

"I should think it would," agreed Tom as he speeded up the motor
and sent the ARROW on her homeward way.

The boys and Mr. Swift were much interested in the experiences of
the balloonist and asked him many questions, which he answered
modestly.  Several hours passed and late that afternoon the party
approached Shopton.

"Here we are!" exclaimed Mr. Swift, relief in his tones.  "Now to
see of what I have been robbed and to get the police after the
scoundrels!"

When the boat was nearing the dock Mr. Sharp, who had been silent
for some time, suddenly turned to Tom and asked:

"Ever invent an airship?"

"No," replied the lad, somewhat surprised.  "I never did."

"I have," went on the balloonist.  "That is, I've invented part of
it.  I'm stuck over some details.  Maybe you and I'll finish it
some day.  How about it?"

"Maybe," assented Tom, who was occupied just then in making a good
landing.  "I am interested in airships, but I never thought I
could build one."

"Easiest thing in the world," went on Mr. Sharp, as if it was an
everyday matter.  "You and I will get busy as soon as we clear up
this robbery."  He talked as though he had been a friend of the
family for some time, for he had a genial, taking manner.

A little later Mr. Swift was excitedly questioning Garret Jackson
concerning the robbery and making an examination of the electrical
shop to discover what was missing.

"They've taken some parts of my gyroscope!" he exclaimed, "and
some valuable tools and papers, as well as some unfinished work
that will be difficult to replace."

"Much of a loss?" asked Mr. Sharp with a business-like air.

"Well, not so large as regards money," answered the inventor, "but
they took things I can never replace, and I will miss them very
much if I cannot get them back."

"Then we'll get them back!" snapped the balloonist, as if that was
all there was to it.

The police were called up on the telephone and the facts given to
them, as well as a description of the stolen things.  They
promised to do what they could, but, in the light of past
experiences, Tom and his father did not think this would be much.
There was little more that could be done that evening.  Ned Newton
went to his home, and, after Mr. Swift had insisted in calling in
his physician to look after Mr. Sharp's burns the balloonist was
given a room next to Tom's.  Then the Swift household settled
down.

"Well," remarked Tom to his father, as he got ready for bed, "this
sure has been an exciting day."

"And my loss is a serious one," added the inventor somewhat sadly.

"Don't worry, dad," begged his son.  "I'll do my best to recover
those things for you."

Several days passed, but there was no clew to the thieves.  That
they were the same ones who had stolen the turbine model there was
little doubt, but they seemed to have covered their tracks well.
The police were at a loss, and, though Tom and Mr. Sharp cruised
about the lake, they could get no trace of the men.  The
balloonist had sent to Pratonia for his clothing and other baggage
and was now installed in the Swift home, where he was invited to
stay a week or two.

One night when he was looking over some papers he had taken from
his trunk the balloonist came over to where Tom was making a
drawing of a new machine he was planning and said:

"Like to see my idea for an airship?  Different from some.  It's a
dirigible balloon with an aeroplane front and rear to steer and
balance it in big winds.  It would be a winner, only for one
thing.  Maybe you can help me."

"Maybe I can," agreed Tom, who was at once interested.

"We ought to be able to do something.  Look at our names--Swift
and Sharp--quick and penetrating--a good firm to build airships,"
and he laughed genially.  "Shall we do it?"

"I'm willing," agreed Tom, and the balloonist spread his plans out
on the table, he and the young inventor soon being deep in a
discussion of them.


CHAPTER XXIV

THE MYSTERY SOLVED

From then on, for several days, the young inventor and his new
friend lived in an atmosphere of airships.  They talked them from
morning until night, and even Mr. Swift, much as he was exercised
over his loss, took part in the discussions.

In the meanwhile efforts had not ceased to locate the robbers and
recover the stolen goods, but so far without success.

One afternoon, about two weeks after the thrilling rescue of John
Sharp, Tom said to the balloonist:

"Wouldn't you like to come for a ride in the motor-boat?  Maybe it
will help us to solve the puzzle of the airship.  We'll take a
trip across and up the opposite shore."

"Good idea," commented Mr. Sharp.  "Fine day for a sail.  Come on.
Blow the cobwebs from our brains."

Mr. Swift declined an invitation to accompany them, as he said he
would stay home and try to straighten out his affairs, which were
somewhat muddled by the robbery.

Out over the blue waters of Lake Carlopa shot the ARROW.  It was
making only moderate speed, as Tom was in no hurry, and he knew
his engine would last longer if not forced too frequently.  They
glided along, crossed the lake and were proceeding up the opposite
shore when, as they turned out from a little bay and rounded a
point of land, Mr. Sharp exclaimed:

"Look out, Tom, there's rowboat just ahead!"

"Oh, I'll pass well to one side of that," answered the young
inventor, looking at the craft.  As he did so, noting that there
were four men in it, one of the occupants caught a glimpse of the
ARROW.  No sooner had he done so than he spoke to his companions,
and they all turned to stare at Tom.  At first the lad could
scarcely believe his eyes, but as he looked more intently he
uttered a cry.

"There they are!"

"Who?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"Those men--the thieves!  We must catch them!"

Tom had spoken loudly, but even though the men in the rowboat did
hear what he said, they would have realized without that that they
were about to be pursued, for there was no mistaking the attitude
of our hero.

Two of the thieves were at the oars, and, with one accord, they at
once increased their speed.  The boat swung about sharply and was
headed for the shore, which they seemed to have come from only a
short time previous, as the craft was not far out in the lake.

"No, you don't!" cried Tom. "I see your game!  You want to get to
the woods, where you'll have a better chance to escape!  If this
isn't great luck, coming upon them this way!"

It was the work of but a moment to speed up the engine and head
the ARROW for the rowboat.  The men were pulling frantically, but
they had no chance.

"Get between them and the shore!" cried Mr. Sharp. "You can head
them off then." This was good advice and Tom followed it. The
men, among whom the lad could recognize Happy Harry and Anson
Morse, were all excited. Two of them stood up, as though to jump
overboard, but their companions called to them to stop.

"If we only had a gun now, not to shoot at them but to intimidate
them," murmured the balloonist, "maybe they'd stop."

"Here's one," answered Tom, pointing to the seat locker, where he
kept the shotgun Mr. Duncan had given him.  In a moment Mr. Sharp
had it out.

"Surrender!" he cried, pointing the weapon at the men in the small
boat.

"Don't shoot!  Don't fire on us!  We'll give up!" cried Happy
Harry, and the two with the oars ceased pulling.

"Don't take any chances," urged Mr. Sharp in a low voice.  "Keep
between them and the shore.  I'll cover them."  Tom was steering
from an auxiliary side wheel near the motor, and soon the ARROW
had cut off the retreat of the men.  They could not land and to
row across the lake meant speedy capture.

"Well, what do you want of us?" growled Morse.  "What right have
you got to interfere with us in this fashion?"

"The best of right," answered Tom.  "You'll find out when you're
landed in jail."

"You can't arrest us," sneered Happy Harry.  "You're not an
officer and you haven't any warrant."

Tom hadn't thought of that, and his chagrin showed in his face.
Happy Harry was quick to see it.

"You'd better let us go," he threatened "We can have you arrested
for bothering us.  You haven't any right to stop us, Tom Swift."

"Maybe he hasn't, but I have!" exclaimed John Sharp suddenly.

"You!  Who are you?" demanded Featherton, alias Simpson, the man
who had run the automobile that carried Tom away.

"Me.  I'm a special deputy sheriff for this county," answered the
balloonist simply.  "Here's my badge," and, throwing back his
coat, he displayed it.  "You see I got the appointment in order to
have some authority in the crowds that gather to watch me go up,"
he explained to Tom, who plainly showed his astonishment.  "I
found it very useful to be able to threaten arrest, but in this
case I'll do more than threaten.  You are my prisoners," he went
on to the men in the boat, and he handled the shotgun as if he
knew how to use it.  "I'll take you into custody on complaint of
Mr. Swift for robbery.  Now will you go quietly or are you going
to make a fuss?" and Mr. Sharp shut his jaw grimly.

"Well, seeing as how you have the drop on us, I guess we'll have
to do as you say," admitted Happy Harry, alias Jim Burke.  "But
you can't prove anything against us.  We haven't any of Mr.
Swift's property."

"Well, you know where it is then," retorted Tom quickly.

Under the restraining influence of the gun the men made no
resistance.  While Mr. Sharp covered them, Tom towed their boat
toward shore.  Then, while the young inventor held the gun, the
balloonist tied the hands and feet of the thieves in a most
scientific manner, for what he did not know about ropes and knots
was not worth putting into a book.

"Now, I guess they'll stay quiet for a while," remarked Mr. Sharp
as he surveyed the crestfallen criminals.  "I'll remain on guard
here, Tom, while you go notify the nearest constable and we'll
take them to jail.  We bagged the whole lot as neatly as could be
desired."

"No, you didn't get all of us!" exclaimed Happy Harry, and there
was a savage anger in his tones.

"Keep quiet!" urged Morse.

"No, I'll not keep quiet!  It's a shame that we have to take our
medicine while that trimmer, Tod Boreck, goes free.  He ought to
have been with us, and he would be, only he's trying to get away
with that sparkler!"

"Keep quiet," again urged Morse.

Tom was all attention.  He had caught the word "sparkler," and he
at once associated it with the occasion he had heard the men use
it before.  He felt that he was on the track of solving the
mystery connected with his boat.

He looked at the men.  They were the same four who had been
involved in the former theft--Appleson, Featherton, Morse and
Burke.  Were there five of them?  He recalled the man who had been
caught tampering with his boat--the man who had tried to bid on
the ARROW at the auction.  Where was he?

"Boreck didn't get what he was after," resumed Happy Harry, "and
I'm going to spoil his game for him.  Say, kid," he went on to
Tom, "look in the front part of your boat--where the gasoline
tank is."

Tom felt his heart beating fast.  At last he felt that he would
solve the puzzle.  He opened the forward compartment.  To his
disappointment it seemed as usual.  Morse and the others were
making a vain effort to silence Happy Harry.

"I don't see anything here," said Tom.

"No, because it's hidden in one of those blocks of wood you use
for a brace," continued the man.  "Which one it is, Boreck didn't
know, so he pulled out two or three, only to be fooled each time.
You must have shifted them, kid, from the way they were when we
had the boat."

"I did," answered the young inventor, recollecting how he had
taken out some of the braces and inserted new ones, then painted
the interior of the compartment.  "What is in the braces, anyhow?"

"The sparkler--a big diamond--in a hollow place in the wood,
kid!" exclaimed Happy Harry, blurting out the words.  "I'm not
going to let Tod Boreck get away with it while we stay in jail."

"Take out all the braces that haven't been moved and have a look,"
suggested Mr. Sharp.  Tom only had to remove two, those farthest
back, for all the others had, at one time or another, been changed
or taken away by the thief.

One of the blocks did not seem to have anything unusual about it,
but at the sight of the other Tom could not repress a cry.  It was
the one that seemed to have had a hole bored in it and then
plugged up again.  He remembered his father noticing it on the
occasion of overhauling the boat.

"The sparkler's in there," said the tramp as he saw the brace.
"Boreck was after it several times, but he never pulled out the
right one."

With his knife Tom dug out the putty that covered the round hole
in the block.  No sooner had he done so than there rolled out into
his hand a white object.  It was something done up in tissue
paper, and as he removed the wrapper, there was a flash in the
sunlight and a large, beautiful diamond was revealed.  The mystery
had been solved.


CHAPTER XXV

WINNING A RACE

"Where did this diamond come from?" demanded Mr. Sharp of the
quartette of criminals.

"That's for us to know and you to find out," sneered Happy Harry.
"I don't care as long as that trimmer Boreck didn't get it.  He
tried to do us out of our share."

"Well, I guess the police will make you tell," went on the
balloonist.  "Go for the constable, Tom."

Leaving his friend to guard the ugly men, who for a time at least
were beyond the possibility of doing harm, Tom hurried off through
the woods to the nearest village.  There he found an officer and
the gang was soon lodged in jail.  The diamond was turned over to
the authorities, who said they would soon locate the owner.

Nor were they long in doing it, for it appeared the gem was part
of a large jewel robbery that had taken place some time before in
a distant city.  The Happy Harry gang, as the men came to be
called, were implicated in it, though they got only a small share
of the plunder.  Search was made for Tod Boreck and he was
captured about a week after his companions.  Seeing that their
game was up, the men made a partial confession, telling where Mr.
Swift's goods had been secreted, and the inventor's valuable
tools, papers and machinery were recovered, no damage having been
done to them.

It developed that after the diamond theft, and when the gang still
had possession of Mr. Hastings' boat, Boreck, sometimes called
Murdock by his cronies, unknown to them, had secreted the jewel in
one of the braces under the gasoline tank.  He expected to get it
out secretly, but the capture of the gang and the sale of the boat
prevented this.  Then he tried to buy the craft to take out the
diamond, but Tom overbid him.  It was Boreck who found Andy's
bunch of keys and used one to open the compartment lock when Tom
surprised him.  The man did manage to remove some of the blocks,
thinking he had the one with the diamond in it, but the fact of
Tom changing them, and painting the compartment deceived him.  The
gang hoped to get some valuables from Mr. Swift's shops, and, to a
certain extent, succeeded after hanging around for several nights
and following him to Sandport, but Tom eventually proved too much
for them.  Even stealing the Arrow, which was taken to aid the
gang in robbing Mr. Swift, did not succeed, and Boreck's plan then
to get possession of the diamond fell through.

It was thought that the gang would get long terms in prison, but
one night, during a violent storm, they escaped from the local
jail and that was the last seen of them for some time.

A few days after the capture as Tom was in the boathouse making
some minor repairs to the motor he heard a voice calling:

"Mistah Swift, am yo' about?"

"Hello, Rad, is that you?" he inquired, recognizing the voice of
the colored owner of the mule Boomerang.

"Yais, sa, dat's me.  I got a lettah fo' yo'.  I were passin' de
post-office an' de clerk asted me to brung it to yo' 'case as how
it's marked 'hurry,' an' he said he hadn't seen yo' to-day."

"That's right.  I've been so busy I haven't had time to go for the
mail," and Tom took the letter, giving Eradicate ten cents for his
trouble.

"Ha, that's good!" exclaimed Tom as he read it.

"Hab some one done gone an' left yo' a fortune, Mistah Swift?"
asked the negro.

"No, but it's almost as good.  It's an invitation to take part in
the motor-boat races next week.  I'd forgotten all about them.  I
must get ready."

"Good land!  Dat's all de risin' generation t'inks about now,"
observed Eradicate, "racin' an' goin' fast.  Mah ole mule
Boomerang am good enough fo' me," and, shaking his head in a
woeful manner, Eradicate went on his way.

Tom told Mr. Sharp and his father of the proposed races of the
Lanton Motor-boat Club, and, as it was required that two persons
be in a craft the size of the ARROW, the young inventor arranged
for the balloonist to accompany him.  Our hero spent the next few
days in tuning up his motor and in getting the ARROW ready for the
contest.

The races took place on that side of Lake Carlopa near where Mr.
Hastings lived, and he was one of the officials of the club.
There were several classes, graded according to the horsepower of
the motors, and Tom found himself in a class with Andy Foger.

"Here's where I beat you," boasted the red-haired youth
exultantly, though his manner toward Tom was more temperate than
usual.  Andy had learned a lesson.

"Well, if you can beat me I'll give you credit for it," answered
Tom.

The first race was for high-powered craft, and in this Mr.
Hastings' new CARLOPA won.  Then came the trial of the small
boats, and Tom was pleased to note that Miss Nestor was on hand in
the tiny DOT.

"Good luck!" he called to her as he was adjusting his timer, for
his turn would come soon.  "Remember what I told you about the
spark," for he had given her a few lessons.

"If I win it will be due to you," she called brightly.

She did win, coming in ahead of several confident lads who had
better boats.  But Miss Nestor handled the DOT to perfection and
crossed the line a boat's length ahead of her nearest competitor.

"Fine!" cried Tom, and then came the warning gun that told him to
get ready for his trial.

This was a five-mile race and had several entrants.  The affair
was a handicap one and Tom had no reason to complain of the rating
allowed him.

"Crack!" went the starting pistol and away went Tom and one or two
others who had the same allowance as did he.  A little later the
others started and finally the last class, including Andy Foger.
The RED STREAK shot ahead and was soon in the lead, for Andy and
Sam had learned better how to handle their craft.  Tom and Mr.
Sharp were worried, but they stuck grimly to the race and when the
turning stake was reached Tom's motor had so warmed up and was
running so well that he crept up on Andy.  A mile from the final
mark Andy and Tom were on even terms, and though the red-haired
lad tried to shake off his rival he could not.  Andy's ignition
system failed him several times and he changed from batteries to
magneto and back again in the hope of getting a little more speed
out of the motor.

But it was not to be.  A half-mile away from the finish Tom, who
had fallen behind a little, crept up on even terms.  Then he
slowly forged ahead, and, a hundred rods from the stake, the young
inventor knew that the race was his.  He clinched it a few minutes
later, crossing the line amid a burst of cheers.  The ARROW had
beaten several boats out of her own class and Tom was very proud
and happy.

"My, but we certainly did scoot along some!" cried Mr. Sharp.
"But that's nothing to how we'll go when we build our airship, eh,
Tom?" and he looked at the flushed face of the lad.

"No, indeed," agreed the young inventor.  "But I don't know that
we'll take part in any races in it.  We'll build it, however, as
soon as we can solve that one difficulty."

They did solve it, as will be told in the next book of this
series, to be called "Tom Swift and His Airship; or, The Stirring
Cruise of the RED CLOUD."  They had some remarkable adventures in
the wonderful craft, and solved the mystery of a great bank
robbery.

This ended the contests of the motor-boats and the little fleet
crowded up to the floats and docks, where the prizes were to be
awarded.  Tom received a handsome silver cup and Miss Nestor a
gold bracelet.

"Now I want all the contestants, winners and losers, to come up to
my house and have lunch," invited Mr. Hastings.

As Tom and the balloonist strolled up the walk to the handsome
house Andy Foger passed them.

"You wouldn't have beaten me if my spark coil hadn't gone back on
me," he said, somewhat sneeringly.

"Maybe," admitted Tom, and just then he caught sight of Mary
Nestor.  "May I take you in to lunch?" he asked.

"Yes," she said, "because you helped me to win," and she blushed
prettily.  And then they all sat down to the tables set out on the
lawn, while Tom looked so often at Mary Nestor that Mr. Sharp said
afterward it was a wonder he found time to eat.  But Tom didn't
care.  He was happy.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Tom Swift And His Motor-Boat
