Project Gutenberg's Etext History of Friedrich II of Prussia V 4
#10 in our series by Thomas Carlyle
V4 of 21


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


History of Friedrich II of Prussia V 4

by Thomas Carlyle

March, 2000  [Etext #2104]


Project Gutenberg's Etext History of Friedrich II of Prussia V 4
*******This file should be named 04frd10.txt or 04frd10.zip*******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 04frd11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 04frd10a.txt


Prepared by D.R. Thompson <drthom@ihug.co.nz>


Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





Prepared by D.R. Thompson <drthom@ihug.co.nz>





Carlyle's "History of Friedrich II of Prussia"




BOOK IV.

FRIEDRICH'S APPRENTICESHIP, FIRST STAGE.
1713-1728.

CHAPTER I.

CHILDHOOD: DOUBLE EDUCATIONAL ELEMENT.


Of Friedrich's childhood, there is not, after all our reading,
much that it would interest the English public to hear tell of.
Perhaps not much of knowable that deserves anywhere to be known.
Books on it, expressly handling it, and Books on Friedrich
Wilhelm's Court and History, of which it is always a main element,
are not wanting: but they are mainly of the sad sort which, with
pain and difficulty, teach us nothing, Books done by pedants and
tenebrific persons, under the name of men; dwelling not on things,
but, at endless length, on the outer husks of things: of
unparalleled confusion, too;--not so much as an Index granted you;
to the poor half-peck of cinders, hidden in these wagon-loads of
ashes, no sieve allowed! Books tending really to fill the mind
with mere dust-whirlwinds,--if the mind did not straightway blow
them out again; which it does. Of these let us say nothing.
Seldom had so curious a Phenomenon worse treatment from the
Dryasdust, species.

Among these Books, touching on Friedrich's childhood, and treating
of his Father's Court, there is hardly above one that we can
characterize as fairly human: the Book written by his little
Sister Wilhelmina, when she grew to size and knowledge of good and
evil; [<italic> Memoires de Frederique Sophie Wilhelmine de
Prusse, Margrave de Bareith <end italic> (Brunswick, Paris et
Londres, l8l2), 2 vols. 8vo.]--and this, of what flighty uncertain
nature it is, the world partly knows. A human Book, however, not a
pedant one: there is a most shrill female soul busy with intense
earnestness here; looking, and teaching us to look. We find it a
VERACIOUS Book, done with heart, and from eyesight and insight;
of a veracity deeper than the superficial sort. It is full of
mistakes, indeed; and exaggerates dreadfully, in its shrill female
way; but is above intending to deceive: deduct the due subtrahend,
--say perhaps twenty-five per cent, or in extreme cases as high as
seventy-five,--you will get some human image of credible
actualities from Wilhelmina. Practically she is our one resource
on this matter. Of the strange King Friedrich Wilhelm and his
strange Court, with such an Heir-Apparent growing up in it, there
is no real light to be had, except what Wilhelmina gives,--or
kindles dark Books of others into giving. For that, too, on long
study, is the result of her, here and there. With so flickery a
wax-taper held over Friedrich's childhood,--and the other dirty
tallow-dips all going out in intolerable odor,--judge if our
success can be very triumphant!

We perceive the little creature has got much from Nature; not the
big arena only, but fine inward gifts, for he is well-born in more
senses than one;--and that in the breeding of him there are two
elements noticeable, widely diverse: the French and the German.
This is perhaps the chief peculiarity; best worth laying hold of,
with the due comprehension, if our means allow.


FIRST EDUCATIONAL ELEMENT, THE FRENCH ONE.

His nurses, governesses, simultaneous and successive, mostly of
French breed, are duly set down in the Prussian Books, and held in
mind as a point of duty by Prussian men; but, in foreign parts,
cannot be considered otherwise than as a group, and merely with
generic features. He had a Frau von Kamecke for Head Governess,--
the lady whom Wilhelmina, in her famed <italic> Memoires, <end
italic> always writes KAMKEN; and of whom, except the floating
gossip found in that Book, there is nothing to be remembered.
Under her, as practical superintendent, SOUS-GOUVERNANTE and
quasi-mother, was the Dame de Roucoulles, a more important person
for us here. Dame de Roucoulles, once de Montbail, the same
respectable Edict-of-Nantes French lady who, five-and-twenty years
ago, had taken similar charge of Friedrich Wilhelm; a fact that
speaks well for the character of her performance in that office.
She had done her first edition of a Prussian Prince in a
satisfactory manner; and not without difficult accidents and
singularities, as we have heard: the like of which were spared her
in this her second edition (so we may call it); a second and, in
all manner of ways, an improved one. The young Fritz swallowed no
shoe-buckles; did not leap out of window, hanging on by the hands;
nor achieve anything of turbulent, or otherwise memorable, in his
infantine history; the course of which was in general smooth, and
runs, happily for it, below the ken of rumor. The Boy, it is said,
and is easily credible, was of extraordinary vivacity; quick in
apprehending all things, and gracefully relating himself to them.
One of the prettiest, vividest little boys; with eyes, with mind
and ways, of uncommon brilliancy;--only he takes less to
soldiering than the paternal heart could wish; and appears to find
other things in the world fully as notable as loud drums, and
stiff men drawn up in rows. Moreover, he is apt to be a little
unhealthy now and then, and requires care from his nurses, over
whom the judicious Roucoulles has to be very vigilant.

Of this respectable Madame de Roucoulles I have read, at least
seven times, what the Prussian Books say of her by way of
Biography; but it is always given in their dull tombstone style;
it has moreover next to no importance; and I,--alas, I do not yet
too well remember it! She was from Normandy; of gentle blood,
never very rich; Protestant, in the Edict-of-Nantes time; and had
to fly her country, a young widow, with daughter and mother-in-law
hanging on her; the whole of them almost penniless. However, she
was kindly received at the Court of Berlin, as usual in that sad
case; and got some practical help towards living in her new
country. Queen Sophie Charlotte had liked her society; and finding
her of prudent intelligent turn, and with the style of manners
suitable, had given her Friedrich Wilhelm to take charge of.
She was at that time Madame de Montbail; widow, as we said:
she afterwards wedded Roucoulles, a refugee gentleman of her own
Nation, who had gone into the Prussian Army, as was common for the
like of him: She had again become a widow, Madame de Roucoulles
this time, with her daughter Montbail still about her, when, by
the grateful good sense of Friedrich Wilhelm, she was again
intrusted as we see;--and so had the honor of governessing
Frederick the Great for the first seven years of his life.
Respectable lady, she oversaw his nurses, pap-boats,--"beer-soup
and bread," he himself tells us once, was his main diet in
boyhood,--beer-soups, dress-frocks, first attempts at walking;
and then also his little bits of intellectualities, moralities;
his incipiencies of speech, demeanor, and spiritual development;
and did her function very honestly, there is no doubt.

Wilhelmina mentions her, at a subsequent period; and we have a
glimpse of this same Roucoulles, gliding about among the royal
young-folk, "with only one tooth left" (figuratively speaking),
and somewhat given to tattle, in Princess Wilhelmina's opinion.
Grown very old now, poor lady; and the dreadfulest bore, when she
gets upon Hanover and her experiences, and Queen Sophie
Charlotte's, in that stupendously magnificent court under
Gentleman Ernst. Shun that topic, if you love your peace of mind!
[<italic> Memoires <end italic> (above cited).]--She did certainly
superintend the Boy Fritzkin for his first seven years; that is a
glory that cannot be taken from her. And her pupil, too, we
agreeably perceive, was always grateful for her services in that
capacity. Once a week, if he were in Berlin, during his youthful
time, he was sure to appear at the Roucoulles Soiree, and say and
look various pleasant things to his "CHER MAMAN (dear Mamma)," as
he used to call her, and to the respectable small parts she had.
Not to speak of other more substantial services, which also were not wanting.

Roucoulles and the other female souls, mainly French, among whom
the incipient Fritz now was, appear to have done their part as
well as could be looked for. Respectable Edict-of-Nantes French
ladies, with high head-gear, wide hoops; a clear, correct, but
somewhat barren and meagre species, tight-laced and high-frizzled
in mind and body. It is not a very fertile element for a young
soul: not very much of silent piety in it; and perhaps of vocal
piety more than enough in proportion. An element founding on what
they call "enlightened Protestantism," "freedom of thought," and
the like, which is apt to become loquacious, and too conscious of
itself; terming, on the whole, rather to contempt of the false,
than to deep or very effective recognition of the true.

But it is, in some important senses, a clear and pure element
withal. At lowest, there are no conscious semi-falsities, or
volunteer hypocrisies, taught the poor Boy; honor, clearness,
truth of word at least; a decorous dignified bearing;
various thin good things, are honestly inculcated and exemplified;
nor is any bad, ungraceful or suspicious thing permitted there,
if recognized for such. It might have been a worse element;
and we must be thankful for it. Friedrich, through life, carries
deep traces of this French-Protestant incipiency: a very big
wide-branching royal tree, in the end; but as small and flexible a
seedling once as any one of us.

The good old Dame de Roucoulles just lived to witness his
accession; on which grand juncture and afterwards, as he had done
before, he continued to express, in graceful and useful ways, his
gratitude and honest affection to her and hers. Tea services,
presents in cut-glass and other kinds, with Letters that were
still more precious to the old Lady, had come always at due
intervals:, and one of his earliest kingly gifts was that of some
suitable small pension for Montbail, the elderly daughter of this
poor old Roucoulles, [Preuss, <italic> Friedrich der Grosse, eine
Lebensgeschichte <end italic> (5 vols. Berlin, 1832-1834),
v. (Urkundenbuch, p. 4). <italic> OEuvres de Frederic <end italic>
(same Preuss's Edition, Berlin, 1846-1850, &c.), xvi. 184, 191.--
The Herr Doctor J. D. E. Preuss, "Historiographer of Brandenburg,"
devoted wholly to the study of Friedrich for five-and-twenty years
past, and for above a dozen years busily engaged in editing the
<italic> OEuvres de Frederic, <end italic> --has, besides that
<italic> Lebensgeschichte <end italic> just cited, three or four
smaller Books, of indistinctly different titles, on the same
subject. A meritoriously exact man; acquainted with the outer
details of Friedrich's Biography (had he any way of arranging,
organizing or setting them forth) as few men ever were or will be.
We shall mean always this <italic> Lebensgeschichte <end italic>
here, when no other title is given: and <italic> OEuvres de
Frederic <end italic> shall signify HIS Edition, unless the
contrary be stated.] who was just singing her DIMITTAES as it
were, still in a blithe and pious manner. For she saw now (in
1740) her little nursling grown to be a brilliant man and King;
King gone out to the Wars, too, with all Europe inquiring and
wondering what the issue would be. As for her, she closed her poor
old eyes, at this stage of the business; piously, in foreign
parts, far from her native Normandy; and did not see farther what
the issue was. Good old Dame, I have, as was observed, read some
seven times over what they call biographical accounts of her;
but have seven times (by Heaven's favor, I do partly believe)
mostly forgotten them again; and would not, without cause, inflict
on any reader the like sorrow. To remember one worthy thing, how
many thousand unworthy things must a man be able to forget!

From this Edict-of-Mantes enviroument, which taught our young
Fritz his first lessons of human behavior,--a polite sharp little
Boy, we do hope and understand,--he learned also to clothe his
bits of notions, emotions, and garrulous utterabilities, in the
French dialect. Learned to speak, and likewise, what is more
important; to THINK, in French; which was otherwise quite
domesticated in the Palace, and became his second mother-tongue.
Not a bad dialect; yet also none of the best. Very lean and
shallow, if very clear and convenient; leaving much in poor Fritz
unuttered, unthought, unpractised, which might otherwise have come
into activity in the course of his life. He learned to read very
soon, I presume; but he did not, now or afterwards, ever learn to
spell. He spells indeed dreadfully ILL, at his first appearance
on the writing stage, as we shall see by and by; and he continued,
to the last, one of the bad spellers of his day. A circumstance
which I never can fully account for, and will leave to the
reader's study.

From all manner of sources,--from inferior valetaille, Prussian
Officials, Royal Majesty itself when not in gala,--he learned, not
less rootedly, the corrupt Prussian dialect of German; and used
the same, all his days, among his soldiers, native officials,
common subjects and wherever it was most convenient; speaking it,
and writing and misspelling it, with great freedom, though always
with a certain aversion and undisguised contempt, which has since
brought him blame in some quarters. It is true, the Prussian form
of German is but rude; and probably Friedrich, except sometimes in
Luther's Bible, never read any German Book. What, if we will think
of it, could he know of his first mother-tongue! German, to this
day, is a frightful dialect for the stupid, the pedant and dullard
sort! Only in the hands of the gifted does it become supremely
good. It had not yet been the language of any Goethe, any Lessing;
though it stood on the eve of becoming such. It had already been
the language of Luther, of Ulrich Hutten, Friedrich Barbarossa,
Charlemagne and others. And several extremely important things had
been said in it, and some pleasant ones even sung in it, from an
old date, in a very appropriate manner,--had Crown-Prince
Friedrich known all that. But he could not reasonably be expected
to know:--and the wiser Germans now forgive him for not knowing,
and are even thankful that he did not.



Chapter II.

THE GERMAN ELEMENT.

So that, as we said, there are two elements for young Fritz, and
highly diverse ones, from both of which he is to draw nourishment,
and assimilate what he can. Besides that Edict-of-Nantes French
element, and in continual contact and contrast with it, which
prevails chiefly in the Female Quarters of the Palace,--there is
the native German element for young Fritz, of which the centre is
Papa, now come to be King, and powerfully manifesting himself as
such. An abrupt peremptory young King; and German to the bone.
Along with whom, companions to him in his social hours, and
fellow-workers in his business, are a set of very rugged German
sons of Nature; differing much from the French sons of Art.
Baron Grumkow, Leopold Prince of Anhalt-Dessau (not yet called the
"OLD Dessauer," being under forty yet), General Glasenap, Colonel
Derschau, General Flans; these, and the other nameless Generals
and Officials, are a curious counterpart to the Camases, the
Hautcharmoys and Forcades, with their nimble tongues and rapiers;
still more to the Beausobres, Achards, full of ecclesiastical
logic, made of Bayle and Calvin kneaded together; and to the
high-frizzled ladies rustling in stiff silk, with the shadow of
Versailles and of the Dragonnades alike present to them.

Born Hyperboreans these others; rough as hemp, and stout of fibre
as hemp; native products of the rigorous North. Of whom, after all
our reading, we know little.--O Heaven, they have had long lines
of rugged ancestors, cast in the same rude stalwart mould, and
leading their rough life there, of whom we know absolutely
nothing! Dumb all those preceding busy generations; and this of
Friedrich Wilhelm is grown almost dumb. Grim semi-articulate
Prussian men; gone all to pipe-clay and mustache for us.
Strange blond-complexioned, not unbeautiful Prussian honorable
women, in hoops, brocades, and unintelligible head-gear and
hair-towers,--ACH GOTT, they too are gone; and their musical talk,
in the French or German language, that also is gone; and the
hollow Eternities have swallowed it, as their wont is, in a very
surprising manner!--

Grumkow, a cunning, greedy-hearted, long-headed fellow, of the old
Pomeranian Nobility by birth, has a kind of superficial polish put
upon his Hyperboreanisms; he has been in foreign countries, doing
legations, diplomacies, for which, at least for the vulpine parts
of which, he has a turn. He writes and speaks articulate
grammatical French; but neither in that, nor in native Pommerish
Platt-Deutsch, does he show us much, except the depths of his own
greed, of his own astucities and stealthy audacities. Of which we
shall hear more than enough by and by.


OF THE DESSAUER, NOT YET "OLD."

As to the Prince of Anhalt-Dessau, rugged man, whose very face is
the color of gunpowder, he also knows French, and can even write
in it, if he like,--having duly had a Tutor of that nation, and
strange adventures with him on the grand tour and elsewhere;--but
does not much practise writing, when it can be helped.
His children, I have heard, he expressly did not teach to read or
write, seeing no benefit in that effeminate art, but left them to
pick it up as they could. His Princess, all rightly ennobled now,
--whom he would not but marry, though sent on the grand tour to
avoid it,--was the daughter of one Fos an Apothecary at Dessau;
and is still a beautiful and prudent kind of woman, who seems to
suit him well enough, no worse than if she had been born a
Princess. Much talk has been of her, in princely and other
circles; nor is his marriage the only strange thing Leopold has
done. He is a man to keep the world's tongue wagging, not too
musically always; though himself of very unvocal nature.
Perhaps the biggest mass of inarticulate human vitality, certainly
one of the biggest, then going about in the world. A man of vast
dumb faculty; dumb, but fertile, deep; no end of ingenuities in
the rough head of him:--as much mother-wit, there, I often guess,
as could be found in whole talking parliaments, spouting
themselves away in vocables and eloquent wind!

A man of dreadful impetuosity withal. Set upon his will as the one
law of Nature; storming forward with incontrollable violence:
a very whirlwind of a man. He was left a minor; his Mother
guardian. Nothing could prevent him from marrying this Fos the
Apothecary's Daughter; no tears nor contrivances of his Mother,
whom he much loved, and who took skilful measures. Fourteen months
of travel in Italy; grand tour, with eligible French Tutor,--whom
he once drew sword upon, getting some rebuke from him one night in
Venice, and would have killed, had not the man been nimble, at
once dexterous and sublime:--it availed not. The first thing he
did, on re-entering Dessau, with his Tutor, was to call at
Apothecary Fos's, and see the charming Mamsell; to go and see his
Mother, wss the second thing. Mot even his grand passion for war
could eradicate Fos: he went to Dutoh William's wars; the wise
mother still counselling, who was own aunt to Dutoh William, and
liked the scheme. He besieged Namur; fought and besieged up and
down,--with insatiable appetite for fighting and sieging;
with great honor, too, and ambitions awakening in him;--campaign
after campaign: but along with the flamy-thundery ideal bride,
figuratively called Bellona, there was always a soft real one,
Mamsell Fos of Dessau, to whom he continued constant.
The Government of his Dominions he left cheerfully to his Mother,
even when he came of age: "I am for learning War, as the one right
trade; do with all things as you please, Mamma,--only not with
Mamsell, not with her!"--

Readers may figure this scene too, and shudder over it.
Some rather handsome male Cousin of Mamsell, Medical Graduate or
whatever he was, had appeared in Dessau:--"Seems, to admire
Mamsell much; of course, in a Platonic way," said rumor:--
"He? Admire?" thinks Leopold;--thinks a good deal of it, not in
the philosophic mood. As he was one day passing Fos's, Mamsell and
the Medical Graduate are visible, standing together at the window
inside. Pleasantly looking out upon Nature,--of course quite
casually, say some Histories with a sneer. In fact, it seems
possible this Medical Graduate may have been set to act shoeing-
horn; but he had better not. Leopold storms into the House,
"Draw, scandalous canaille, and defend yourself!"--And in this, or
some such way, a confident tradition says, he killed the poor
Medical Graduate there and then. One tries always to hope not:
but Varnhagen is positive, though the other Histories say nothing
of it. God knows. The man was a Prince; no Reichshofrath,
Speyer-Wetzlar KAMMER, or other Supreme Court, would much trouble
itself, except with formal shakings of the wig, about such a
peccadillo. In fine, it was better for Leopold to marry the Miss
Fos; which he actually did (1698, in his twenty-second year),
"with the left-hand,"--and then with the right and both hands;
having got her properly ennobled before long, by his splendid
military services. She made, as we have hinted, an excellent Wife
to him, for the fifty or sixty ensuing years.

This is a strange rugged specimen, this inarticulate Leopold;
already getting mythic, as we can perceive, to the polished vocal
ages; which mix all manner of fables with the considerable history
he has. Readers will see him turn up again in notable forms. A man
hitherto unknown except in his own country; and yet of very
considerable significance to all European countries whatsoever;
the fruit of his activities, without his name attached, being now
manifest in all of them. He invented the iron ramrod; he invented
the equal step; in fact, he is the inventor of modern military
tactics. Even so, if we knew it: the Soldiery of every civilized
country still receives from this man, on parade-fields and
battle-fields, its word of command; out of his rough head
proceeded the essential of all that the innumerable
Drill-sergeants, in various languages, daily repeat and enforce.
Such a man is worth some transient glance from his
fellow-creatures,--especially with a little Fritz trotting at his
foot, and drawing inferences from him.

Dessau, we should have said for the English reader's behoof, was
and still is a little independent Principality; about the size of
Huntingdonshire, but with woods instead of bogs;--revenue of it,
at this day, is 60,000 pounds, was perhaps not 20, or even 10,000
in Leopold's first time. It lies some fourscore miles southwest of
Berlin, attainable by post-horses in a day. Leopold, as his Father
had done, stood by Prussia as if wholly native to it. Leopold's
Mother was Sister of that fine Louisa, the Great Elector's first
Wife; his Sister is wedded to the Margraf of Schwedt, Friedrich
Wilhelm's half-uncle. Lying in such neighborhood, and being in
such affinity to the Prussian House, the Dessauers may be said to
have, in late times, their headquarters at Berlin. Leopold and
Leopold's sons, as his father before him had done, without
neglecting their Dessau and Principality, hold by the Prussian
Army as their main employment. Not neglecting Dessau either;
but going thither in winter, or on call otherwise; Leopold
least of all neglecting it, who neglects nothing that can be
useful to him.

He is General Field-Marshal of the Prussian Armies, the foremost
man in war-matters with this new King; and well worthy to be so.
He is inventing, or brooding in the way to invent, a variety of
things,--"iron ramrods," for one; a very great improvement on the
fragile ineffective wooden implement, say all the Books, but give
no date to it; that is the first thing; and there will be others,
likewise undated, but posterior, requiring mention by and by.
Inventing many things;--and always well practising what is already
invented, and known for certain. In a word, he is drilling to
perfection, with assiduous rigor, the Prussian Infantry to be the
wonder of the world. He has fought with them, too, in a conclusive
manner; and is at all times ready for fighting.

He was in Malplaquet with them, if only as volunteer on that
occasion. He commanded them in Blenheim itself; stood, in the
right or Eugene wing of that famed Battle of Blenheim, fiercely at
bay, when the Austrian Cavalry had all fled;--fiercely volleying,
charging, dexterously wheeling and manoeuvring; sticking to his
ground with a mastiff-like tenacity,--till Marlborough, and
victory from the left, relieved him and others. He was at the
Bridge of Cassano; where Eugene and Vendome came to hand-grips;--
where Mirabeau's Grandfather, COL-D'ARGENT, got his six-and-thirty
wounds, and was "killed" as he used to term it. [Carlyle's
<italic> Miscellanies, <end italic> v. ? Mirabeau.] "The hottest
fire I ever saw," said Eugene, who had not seen Malplaquet at that
time. While Col-d'Argent sank collapsed upon the Bridge, and the
horse charged over him, and again charged, and beat and were
beaten three several times,--Anhalt-Dessau, impatient of such
fiddling hither and thither, swashed into the stream itself with
his Prussian Foot: swashed through it, waist-deep or breast-deep;
and might have settled the matter, had not his cartridges got
wetted. Old King Friedrich rebuked him angrily for his impetuosity
in this matter, and the sad loss of men.

Then again he was at the Storming of the Lines of Turin,--Eugene's
feat of 1706, and a most volcanic business;--was the first man
that got-over the entrenchment there. Foremost man; face all black
with the smoke of gunpowder, only channelled here and there with
rivulets of sweat;--not a lovely phenomenon to the French in the
interior! Who still fought like madmen, but were at length driven
into heaps, and obliged to run. A while before they ran,
Anhalt-Dessau, noticing some Captain posted with his company in a
likely situation, stept aside to him for a moment, and asked,
"Am I wounded, think you.?--No? Then have you anything to drink?"
and deliberately "drank a glass of aqua-vitae," the judicious
Captain carrying a pocket-pistol of that sort, in case of
accident; and likewise "eat, with great appetite, a bit of bread
from one of the soldiers' haversacks; saying, He believed the heat
of the job was done, and that there was no fear now!"--<italic>
Des weltberumkten Leopoldi, &c. <end italic>  (Anonymous, by
Ranfft, cited above), pp. 42-45, 52, 65.]

A man that has been in many wars; in whose rough head, are schemes
hatching. Any religion he has is of Protestant nature; but he has
not much,--on the doctrinal side, very little. Luther's Hymn,
<italic> Eine feste Burg ist unser Gott, <end italic> he calls
"God Almighty's grenadier-march." On joining battle, he audibly
utters, with bared head, some growl of rugged prayer, far from
orthodox at times, but muoh in earnest: that lifting of his hat
for prayer, is his last signal on such occasions. He is very
cunning as required, withal; not disdaining the serpentine method
when no other will do. With Friedrich Wilhelm, who is his
second-cousin (Mother's grand-nephew, if the reader can count
that), he is from of old on the best footing, and contrives to be
his Mentor in many things besides War. Till his quarrel with
Grumkow, of which we shall hear, he took the lead in political
advising, too; and had schemes, or was thought to have, of which
Queen Sophie was in much terror.

A tall, strong-boned, hairy man; with cloudy brows, vigilant swift
eyes; has "a bluish tint of skin," says Wilhelmina, "as if the
gunpowder still stuck to him." He wears long mustaches; triangular
hat, plume and other equipments, are of thrifty practical size.
Can be polite enough in speech; but hides much of his meaning,
which indeed is mostly inarticulate, and not always joyful to
the by-stander. He plays rough pranks, too, on occasion; and has
a big horse-laugh in him, where there is a fop to be roasted,
or the like. We will leave him for the present, in hope of
other meetings.

Remarkable men, many of those old Prussian soldiers: of whom one
wishes, to no purpose, that there had more knowledge been
attainable. But the Books are silent; no painter, no genial
seeing-man to paint with his pen, was there. Grim hirsute
Hyperborean figures, they pass mostly mute before us: burly,
surly; in mustaches, in dim uncertain garniture, of which the
buff-belts and the steel, are alone conspicuous. Growling in
guttural Teutsoh what little articulate meaning they had:
spending, of the inarticulate, a proportion in games, of chance,
probably too in drinking beer; yet having an immense overplus
which they do not so spend, but endeavor to utter in such working
as there may be. So have the Hyperboreans lived from of old.
From the times of Tacitus and Pytheas, not to speak of Odin and
Japhet, what hosts of them have marched across Existence, in that
manner;--and where is the memory that would, even if it could,
speak of them all!--

We will hope the mind of our little Fritz has powers of
assimilation. Bayle-Calvin logics, and shadows of Versailles,
on this hand, and gunpowder Leopolds and inarticulate Hyperboreans
on that: here is a wide diversity of nutriment, all rather tough
in quality, provided for the young soul. Innumerable unconscious
inferences he must have drawn in his little head! Prince Leopold's
face, with the whiskers and blue skin, I find he was wont, at
after periods, to do in caricature, under the figure of a Cat's;--
horror and admiration not the sole feelings raised in him by the
Field-Marshal.--For bodily nourishment he had "beer-soup;"
a decided Spartan tone prevailing, wherever possible, in the
breeding and treatment of him.

And we need not doubt, by far the most important element of his
education was the unconscious Apprenticeship he continually served
to such a Spartan as King Friedrich Wilhelm. Of whose works and
ways he could not help taking note, angry or other, every day and
hour; nor in the end, if he were intelligent, help understanding
them, and learning from them. A harsh Master and almost half-mad,
as it many times seemed to the poor Apprentice; yet a true and
solid one, whose real wisdom was worth that of all the others, as
he came at length to recognize.



Chapter III.

FBIEDRICH WILHELM IS KING.

With the death of old King Friedrich, there occurred at once vast
changes in the Court of Berlin; a total and universal change in
the mode of living and doing business there. Friedrich Wilhelm,
out of filial piety, wore at his father's funeral the grand French
peruke and other sublimities of French costume; but it was for the
last time: that sad duty once done, he flung the whole aside, not
without impatience, and on no occasion wore such costume again.
He was not a friend to French fashions, nor had ever been; far the
contrary. In his boyhood, say the Biographers, there was once a
grand embroidered cloth-of-gold, or otherwise supremely
magnificent, little Dressing-gown given him; but he would at no
rate put it on, or be concerned with it; on the contrary, stuffed
it indignantly "into the fire;" and demanded wholesome useful
duffel instead.

He began his reform literally at the earliest moment.
Being summoned into the apartment where his poor Father was in the
last struggle, he could scarcely get across for KAMMERJUNKER,
KAMMERHERRN, Goldsticks, Silversticks, and the other solemn
histrionic functionaries, all crowding there to do their sad
mimicry on the occasion: not a lovely accompaniment in Friedrich
Wilhelm's eyes. His poor Father's death-struggle once done, and
all reduced to everlasting rest there, Friedrich Wilhelm looked in
silence over the Unutterable, for a Short space, disregardful of
the Goldsticks and their eager new homaging; walked swiftly away
from it to his own room, shut the door with a slam; and there,
shaking the tears from his eyes, commenced by a notable duty,--the
duty nearest hand, and therefore first to be done, as it seemed to
him. It was about one in the afternoon, 25th February, 1713;
his Father dead half an hour before: "Tears at a Father's
death-bed, must they be dashed with rage by such a set of greedy
Histrios?" thought Friedrich Wilhelm. He summoned these his
Court-people, that is to say, summoned their OBER-HOFMARSCHALL and
representative; and through him signified to them, That, till the
Funeral was over, their service would continue; and that on the
morrow after the Funeral, they were, every soul of them,
discharged; and from the highest Goldstick down to the lowest
Page-in-waiting, the King's House should be swept entirely clean
of them;--said House intending to start afresh upon a quite new
footing. [Forster, i. 174; Pollnitz, <italic> Memoiren, <end
italic> ii. 4.] Which spread such a consternation among the
courtier people, say the Histories, as was never seen before.

The thing was done, however; and nobody durst whisper discontent
with it; this rugged young King, with his plangent metallic voice,
with his steady-beaming eyes, seeming dreadfully in earnest about
it, and a person that might prove dangerous if you crossed him.
He reduced his Household accordingly, at once, to the lowest
footing of the indispensable; and discharged a whole regiment of
superfluous official persons, court-flunkies, inferior, superior
and supreme, in the most ruthless manner. He does not intend
keeping any OBER-HOFMARSCHALL, or the like idle person,
henceforth; thinks a minimum of the Goldsticks ought to suffice
every man.

Eight Lackeys, in the ante-chambers and elsewhere, these, with
each a JAGERBURSCH (what we should call an UNDER-KEEPER) to assist
when not hunting, will suffice: Lackeys at "eight THALERS
monthly," which is six shillings a week. Three active Pages,
sometimes two, instead of perhaps three dozen idle that there used
to be. In King Friedrich's time, there were wont to be a thousand
saddle-horses at corn and hay: but how many of them were in actual
use? Very many of them were mere imaginary quadrupeds; their price
and keep pocketed by some knavish STALLMEISTER, Equerry or
Head-groom. Friedrich Wilhelm keeps only thirty Horses; but these
are very actual, not imaginary at all; their corn not running into
any knave's pocket; but lying actually in the mangers here;
getting ground for you into actual four-footed speed, when, on
turf or highway, you require such a thing. About, thirty for the
saddle,--with a few carriage-teams, are what Friedrich Wilhelm
can employ in any reasonable measure: and more he will not have
about him.

In the like ruthless humor he goes over his Pension-list;
strikes three fourths of that away, reduces the remaining fourth
to the very bone. In like humor, he goes over every department of
his Administrative, Household and other Expenses: shears
everything down, here by the hundred thalers, there by the ten,
willing even to save HALF A THALER. He goes over all this three
several times;--his Papers, the three successive Lists he used on
that occasion, have been printed. [Rodenbeck, <italic> Beitrage
zur Bereicherung der Lebembeschreibungen Friedrich Wilhelms I. und
Friedrichs des Grossen <end italic> (Berlin, 1836), pp. 99-127.]
He has satisfied himself, in about two months, what, the effective
minimum is; and leaves it so. Reduced to below the fifth of what
it was; 55,000 THALERS, instead of 276,000. [Stenzel, iii. 237.]

By degrees he went over, went into and through, every department
of Prussian Business, in that fashion; steadily, warily,
irresistibly compelling every item of it, large and little, to
take that same character of perfect economy and solidity, of
utility pure and simple. Needful work is to be rigorously well
done; needless work, and ineffectual or imaginary workers, to be
rigorously pitched out of doors. What a blessing on this Earth;
worth purchasing almost at any price! The money saved is
something, nothing if you will; but the amount of mendacity
expunged, has any one computed that? Mendacity not of tongue;
but the far feller sort, of hand, and of heart, and of head;
short summary of all Devil's-worship whatsoever. Which spreads
silently along, once you let it in, with full purse or with empty;
some fools even praising it: the quiet DRY-ROT of Nations!
To expunge such is greatly the duty of every man, especially of
every King. Unconsciously, not thinking of Devil's-worship, or
spiritual dry-rot, but of money chiefly, and led by Nature and the
ways she has with us, it was the task of Friedrich Wilhelm's life
to bring about this beneficent result in all departments of
Prussian Business, great and little, public and even private.
Year after year, he brings it to perfection; pushes it unweariedly
forward every day and hour. So that he has Prussia, at last, all a
Prussia made after his own image; the most thrifty, hardy,
rigorous and Spartan country any modern King ever tied over;
and himself (if he thought of that) a King indeed. He that models
Nations according to his own image, he is a King, though his
sceptre were a walking-stick; and, properly no other is.

Friedrich Wilhelm was wondered at, and laughed at, by innumerable
mortals for his ways of doing; which indeed were very strange.
Not that he figured much in what is called Public History, or
desired to do so; for, though a vigilant ruler, he did not deal in
protocolling and campaining,--he let a minimum of that suffice
him. But in court soirees, where elegant empty talk goes on, and
of all materials for it scandal is found incomparably the most
interesting. I suppose there turned up no name oftener than that
of his Prussian Majesty; and during these twenty-seven years of
his Reign, his wild pranks and explosions gave food for continual
talk in such quarter.

For he was like no other King that then existed, or had ever been
discovered. Wilder Son of Nature seldom came into the artificial
world; into a royal throne there, probably never. A wild man,
wholly in earnest, veritable as the old rocks,--and with a
terrible volcanic fire in him too. He would have been strange
anywhere; but among the dapper Royal gentlemen of the Eighteenth
Century, what was to be done with such an Orson of a King?--Clap
him in Bedlam, and bring out the ballot-boxes instead? The modern
generation, too, still takes its impression of him from these
rumors,--still more now from Wilhelmina's Book; which paints the
outside savagery of the royal man, in a most striking manner;
and leaves the inside vacant, undiscovered by Wilhelmina or
the rumors.

Nevertheless it appears there were a few observant eyes even of
contemporaries, who discerned in him a surprising talent for
"National Economics" at least. One Leipzig Professor, Saxon, not
Prussian by nation or interest, recognizes in Friedrich Wilhelm
"DEN GROSSEN WIRTH (the great Manager, Husbandry-man, or Landlord)
of the epoch;" and lectures on his admirable "works, arrangements
and institutions" in that kind. [Rodenbeck's <italic> Beitrage
<end italic> (p. 14),--Year, or Name of Lecturer, not mentioned.]
Nay the dapper Royal gentlemen saw, with envy, the indubitable
growth of this mad savage Brother; and ascribed it to "his
avarice," to his mean ways, which were in such contrast to their
sublime ones. That he understood National Economics has now become
very certain. His grim semi-articulate Papers and Rescripts, on
these subjects, are still almost worth reading, by a lover of
genuine human talent in the dumb form. For spelling, grammar,
penmanship and composition, they resemble nothing else extant;
are as if done by the paw of a bear: indeed the utterance
generally sounds more like the growling of a bear than anything
that could be handily spelt or parsed. But there is a decisive
human sense in the heart of it; and there is such a dire hatred of
empty bladders, unrealities and hypocritical forms and pretences,
what he calls "wind and humbug (WIND UND BLAUER DUNST)," as is
very strange indeed. Strange among all mankind; doubly and trebly
strange among the unfortunate species called Kings in our time.
To whom,--for sad reasons that could be given,--"wind and blue
vapor (BLAUER DUNST)," artistically managed by the rules of
Acoustics and Optics, seem to be all we have left us!--

It must be owned that this man is inflexibly, and with a fierce
slow inexorable determination, set upon having realities round
him. There is a divine idea of fact put into him; the genus sham
was never hatefuler to any man. Let it keep out of his way, well
beyond the swing of that rattan of his, or it may get something to
remember! A just man, too; would not wrong any man, nor play false
in word or deed to any man. What is Justice but another form of
the REALITY we love; a truth acted out? Of all the humbugs or
"painted vapors" known, Injustice is the least capable of
profiting men or kings! A just man, I say; and a valiant and
veracious: but rugged as a wild bear; entirely inarticulate, as if
dumb. No bursts of parliamentary eloquence in him, nor the least
tendency that way. His talent for Stump-Oratory may be reckoned
the minimum conceivable, or practically noted a ZERO. A man who
would not have risen in modern Political Circles; man unchoosable
at hustings or in caucus; man forever invisible, and very
unadmirable if seen, to the Able Editor and those that hang by
him. In fact, a kind of savage man, as we say; but highly
interesting, if you can read dumb human worth; and of
inexpressible profit to the Prussian Nation.

For the first ten years of his reign, he had a heavy, continual
struggle, getting his finance and other branches of administration
extricated from their strangling imbroglios of coiled nonsense,
and put upon a rational footing. His labor in these years, the
first of little Fritz's life, must have been great; the pushing
and pulling strong and continual. The good plan itself, this comes
not of its own accord; it is the fruit of "genius" (which means
transcendent capacity of taking trouble, first of all): given a
huge stack of tumbled thrums, it is not in your sleep that you
will find the vital centre of it, or get the first thrum by the
end! And then the execution, the realizing, amid the
contradiction, silent or expressed, of men and things? Explosive
violence was by no means Friedrich Wilhelm's method; the amount of
slow stubborn broad-shouldered strength, in all kinds, expended by
the man, strikes us as very great. The amount of patience even,
though patience is not reckoned his forte.

That of the RITTER-DIENST (Knights'-Service), for example, which
is but one small item of his business, the commuting of the old
feudal duty of his Landholders to do Service in Wartime, into a
fixed money payment: nothing could be fairer, more clearly
advantageous to both parties; and most of his "Knights" gladly
accepted the proposal: yet a certain factious set of them, the
Magdeburg set, stirred up by some seven or eight of their number,
"hardly above seven or eight really against me," saw good to stand
out; remonstrated, recalcitrated; complained in the Diet (Kaiser
too happy to hear of it, that he might have a hook on Friedrich
Wilhelm); and for long years that paltry matter was a provocation
to him. [1717-1725. Forster, ii. 162-165, iv. 31-34; Stenzel,
iii. 316-319; Samuel Buchholz, <italic> Neueste Preussisch-
Brandenburgische Geschichte <end italic> (Berlin, 1775), i. 197.]
But if your plan is just, and a bit of Nature's plan, persist in
it like a law of Nature. This secret too was known to Friedrich
Wilhelm. In the space of ten years, by actual human strength
loyally spent, he had managed many things; saw all things
in a course towards management. All things, as it were, fairly
on the road; the multiplex team pulling one way, in rational
human harness, not in imbroglios of coiled thrums made by
the Nightmares.

How he introduced a new mode of farming his Domain Lands, which
are a main branch of his revenue, and shall be farmed on regular
lease henceforth, and not wasted in peculation and indolent
mismanagement as heretofore; [Forster, ii. 206, 216.] new modes of
levving his taxes and revenues of every kind: [Ib. ii. 190, 195.]
How he at last concentrated, and harmonized into one easy-going
effective GENERAL DIRECTORY, [Completedd 19th January, 1723
(Ib. ii. 172).] the multifarious conflicting Boards, that were
jolting and jangling in a dark use-and-wont manner, and leaving
their work half done, when he first came into power: [Dohm,
<italic> Denkwurdigkeiten meiner Zeit <end italic> (Lemgo und
Hanover, 1814-1819), iv. 88.] How he insisted on having daylight
introduced to the very bottom of every business, fair-and-square
observed as the rule of it, and the shortest road adopted for
doing it: How he drained bogs, planted colonies, established
manufactures, made his own uniforms of Prussian wool, in a
LAGERHAUS of his own: How he dealt with the Jew Gompert about
farming his Tobacoo;--how, from many a crooked case and character
he, by slow or short methods, brought out something straight;
would take no denial of what was his, nor make any demand of what
was not; and did prove really a terror to evildoers of various
kinds, especially to prevaricators, defalcators, imaginary
workers, and slippery unjust persons: How he urged diligence on
all mortals, would not have the very Apple-women sit "without
knitting" at their stalls; and brandished his stick, or struck it
fiercely down, over the incorrigibly idle:--All this, as well as
his ludicrous explosions and unreasonable violences, is on record
concerning Friedrich Wilhelm, though it is to the latter chiefly
that the world has directed its unwise attention, in judging of
him. He was a very arbitrary King. Yes, but then a good deal of
his ARBITRIUM, or sovereign will, was that of the Eternal Heavens
as well; and did exceedingly behoove to be done, if the Earth
would prosper. Which is an immense consideration in regard to his
sovereign will and him! He was prompt with his rattan, in urgent
cases; had his gallows also, prompt enough, where needful.
Let him see that no mistakes happen, as certainly he means that
none shall!

Yearly he made his country richer; and this not in money alone
(which is of very uncertain value, and sometimes has no value at
all, and even less), but in frugality, diligence, punctuality,
veracity,--the grand fountains from which money, and all real
values and valors spring for men. To Friedrich Wilhelm in his
rustio simplicity, money had no lack of value; rather the reverse.
To the homespun man it was a success of most excellent quality,
and the chief symbol of success in all kinds. Yearly he made his
own revenues, and his people's along with them and as the source
of them, larger: and in all states of his revenue, he had
contrived to make his expenditure less than it; and yearly saved
masses of coin, and "reposited them in barrels in the cellars of
his Schloss,"--where they proved very useful, one day. Much in
Friedrich Wilhelm proved useful, beyond even his expectations.
As a Nation's HUSBAND he seeks his fellow among Kings, ancient and
modern. Happy the Nation which gets such a Husband, once in the
half-thousand years. The Nation, as foolish wives and Nations do,
repines and grudges a good deal, its weak whims and will being
thwarted very often; but it advances steadily, with consciousness
or not, in the way of well-doing; and afterlong times the harvest
of this diligent sowing becomes manifest to the Nation and to
all Nations.

Strange as it sounds in the Republic of Letters, we are tempted to
call Friedrich Wilhelm a man of genius;--genius fated and promoted
to work in National Husbandry, not in writing Verses or
three-volume Novels. A silent genius. His melodious stanza, which
he cannot bear to see halt in any syllable, is a rough fact
reduced to order; fact made to stand firm on its feet, with the
world-rocks under it, and looking free towards all the winds and
all the stars. He goes about suppressing platitudes, ripping off
futilities, turning deceptions inside out. The realm of Disorder,
which is Unveracity, Unreality, what we call Chaos, has no fiercer
enemy. Honest soul, and he seemed to himself such a stupid fellow
often; no tongue-learning at all; little capable to give a reason
for the faith that was in him. He cannot argue in articulate
logic, only in inarticulate bellowings, or worse. He must DO a
thing, leave it undemonstrated; once done, it will itself tell
what kind of thing it is, by and by. Men of genius have a hard
time, I perceive, whether born on the throne or off it; and must
expect contradictions next to unendurable,--the plurality of
blockheads being so extreme!

I find, except Samuel Johnson, no man of equal veracity with
Friedrich Wilhelm in that epoch: and Johnson too, with all his
tongue-learning, had not logic enough. In fact, it depends on how
much conviction you have. Blessed be Heaven, there is here and
there a man born who loves truth as truth should be loved, with
all his heart and all his soul; and hates untruth with a
corresponding perfect hatred. Such men, in polite circles, which
understand that certainly truth is better than untruth, but that
you must be polite to both, are liable to get to the end of their
logic. Even Johnson had a bellow in him; though Johnson could at
any time withdraw into silence, HIS kingdom lying all under his
own hat. How much more Friedrich Wilhelm, who had no logic
whatever; and whose kingdom lay without him, far and wide, a thing
he could not withdraw from. The rugged Orson, he needed to be
right. From utmost Memel down to Wesel again, ranked in a
straggling manner round the half-circumference of Europe, all
manner of things and persons were depending on him, and on his
being right, not wrong, in his notion.

A man of clear discernment, very good natural eyesight;
and irrefragably confident in what his eyes told him, in what his
belief was;--yet of huge simplicity withal. Capable of being
coaxed about, and led by the nose, to a strange degree, if there
were an artist dexterous enough, daring enough! His own natural
judgment was good, and, though apt to be hasty and headlong, was
always likely to come right in the end; but internally, we may
perceive, his modesty, self-distrust, anxiety and other unexpected
qualities, must have been great. And then his explosiveness,
impatience, excitability; his conscious dumb ignorance of all
things beyond his own small horizon of personal survey! An Orson
capable enough of being coaxed and tickled, by some first-rate
conjurer;--first-rate; a second-rate might have failed, and got
torn to pieces for his pains. But Seckendorf and Grumkow, what a
dance they led him on some matters,--as we shall see, and as poor
Fritz and others will see!

He was full of sensitiveness, rough as he was and shaggy of skin.
His wild imaginations drove him hither and thither at a sad rate.
He ought to have the privileges of genius. His tall Potsdam
Regiment, his mad-looking passion for enlisting tall men;
this also seems to me one of the whims of genius,--an exaggerated
notion to have his "stanza" polished to the last punctilio of
perfection; and might be paralleled in the history of Poets.
Stranger "man of genius," or in more peculiar circumstances, the
world never saw!

Friedrich Wilhelm, in his Crown-Prince days, and now still more
when he was himself in the sovereign place, had seen all along,
with natural arithmetical intellect, That his strength in this
world, as at present situated, would very much depend upon the
amount of potential-battle that lay in him,--on the quantity and
quality of Soldiers he could maintain, and have ready for the
field at any time. A most indisputable truth, and a heartfelt one
in the present instance. To augment the quantity, to improve the
quality, in this thrice-essential particular: here lay the
 keystone and crowning summit of all Friedrich Wilhelm's
endeavors; to which he devoted himself, as only the best Spartan
could have done. Of which there will be other opportunities to
speak in detail. For it was a thing world-notable;
world-laughable, as was then thought; the extremely serious fruit
of which did at length also become notable enough.

In the Malplaquet time, once on some occasion, it is said, two
English Officers, not well informed upon the matter, and provoking
enough in their contemptuous ignorance, were reasoning with one
another in Friedrich Wilhelm's hearing, as to the warlike powers
of the Prussian State, and Whether the King of Prussia could on
his own strength maintain a standing army of 15,000? Without
subsidies, do you think, so many as 15,000? Friedrich Wilhelm,
incensed at the thing and at the tone, is reported to have said
with heat: "Yes, 30,000!" [Forster, i. 138.] whereat the military
men slightly wagged their heads, letting the matter drop for the
present. But he makes it good by degrees; twofold or threefold;--
and will have an army of from seventy to a hundred thousand before
he dies, ["72,000 field-troops, 30,000 garrison-troops" <italic>
(Gestandnisse eines OEster reichischen Veterans, <end italic>
Breslau, 1788, i. 64).] the best-drilled of fighting men; and what
adds much to the wonder, a full Treasury withal. This is the
Brandenburg Spartan King; acquainted with National Economics.
Alone of existing Kings he lays by money annually; and is laying
by many other and far more precious things, for Prussia and the
little Boy he has here.

Friedrich Wilhelm's passion for drilling, recruiting and
perfecting his army attracted much notice: laughing satirical
notice; in the hundred months of common rumor, which he regarded
little; and notice iracund and minatory, when it led him into
collision with the independent portions of mankind, now and then.
This latter sort was not pleasant, and sometimes looked rather
serious; but this too he contrived always to digest in some
tolerable manner. He continued drilling and recruiting,--we may
say not his Army only, but his Nation in all departments of it,--
as no man before or since ever did: increasing, by every devisable
method, the amount of potential-battle that lay in him and it.

In a military, and also in a much deeper sense, he may be defined
as the great Drill-sergeant of the Prussian Nation. Indeed this
had been the function of the Hohenzollerns all along; this
difficult, unpleasant and indispensable one of drilling. From the
first appearance of Burggraf Friedrich, with good words and with
HEAVY PEG, in the wreck of anarchic Brandenburg, and downwards
ever since, this has steadily enough gone on. And not a little
good drilling these populations have had, first and last;
just orders given them (wise and just, which to a respectable
degree were Heaven's orders as well): and certainly Heavy Peg, for
instance,--Heavy Peg, bringing Quitzow's strong House about his
ears,--was a respectable drummer's cat to enforce the same.
This has been going on these three hundred years. But Friedrich
Wilhelm completes the process; finishes it off to the last pitch
of perfection. Friedrich Wilhelm carries it through every fibre
and cranny of Prussian Business, and so far as possible, of
Prussian Life; so that Prussia is all a drilled phalanx, ready to
the word of command; and what we see in the Army is but the last
consummate essence of what exists in the Nation everywhere.
That was Friedrich Wilhelm's function, made ready for him, laid to
his hand by his Hohenzollern foregoers; and indeed it proved a
most beneficent function.

For I have remarked that, of all things, a Nation needs first to
be drilled; and no Nation that has not first been governed by
so-called "Tyrants," and held tight to the curb till it became
perfect in its paces and thoroughly amenable to rule and law, and
heartily respectful of the same, and totally abhorrent of the want
of the same, ever came to much in this world. England itself, in
foolish quarters of England, still howls and execrates lamentably
over its William Conqueror, and rigorous line of Normans and
Plantagenets; but without them, if you will consider well, what
had it ever been? A gluttonous race of Jutes and Angles, capable
of no grand combinations; lumbering about in pot-bellied
equanimity; not dreaming of heroic toil and silence and endurance,
such as leads to the high places of this Universe, and the golden
mountain-tops where dwell the Spirits of the Dawn. Their very
ballot-boxes and suffrages, what they call their "Liberty," if
these mean "Liberty," and are such a road to Heaven, Anglo-Saxon
high-road thither,--could never have been possible for them on
such terms. How could they? Nothing but collision, intolerable
interpressure (as of men not perpendicular), and consequent battle
often supervening, could have been appointed those undrilled
Anglo-Saxons; their pot-bellied equanimity itself continuing
liable to perpetual interruptions, as in the Heptarchy time.
An enlightened Public does not reflect on these things at present;
but will again, by and by. Looking with human eyes over the
England that now is, and over the America and the Australia, from
pole to pole; and then listening to the Constitutional litanies of
Dryasaust, and his lamentations on the old Norman and Plantagenet
Kings, and his recognition of departed merit and causes of
effects,--the mind of man is struck dumb!



Chapter IV.

HIS MAJESTY'S WAYS.

Friedrich Wilhelm's History is one of ECONOMICS; which study, so
soon as there are Kings again in this world, will be precious to
them. In that happy state of matters, Friedrich Wilhelm's History
will well reward study; and teach by example, in a very simple and
direct manner. In what is called the Political, Diplomatic,
"Honor-to-be" department, there is not, nor can ever be, much to
be said of him; this Economist King having always kept himself
well at home, and looked steadily to his own affairs. So that for
the present he has, as a King, next to nothing of what is called
History; and it is only as a fellow-man, of singular faculty, and
in a most peculiar and conspicuous situation, that he can be
interesting to mankind. To us he has, as Father and daily teacher
and master of young Fritz, a continual interest; and we must note
the master's ways, and the main phenomena of the workshop as they
successively turned up, for the sake of the notable Apprentice
serving there.

He was not tall of stature, this arbitrary King:
a florid-complexioned stout-built man; of serious, sincere,
authoritative face; his attitudes and equipments very Spartan in
type. Man of short firm stature; stands (in Pesne's best Portraits
of him) at his ease, and yet like a tower. Most solid; "plumb and
rather more;" eyes steadfastly awake; cheeks slightly compressed,
too, which fling the mouth rather forward; as if asking silently,
"Anything astir, then? All right here?" Face, figure and bearing,
all in him is expressive of robust insight, and direct
determination; of healthy energy, practicality, unquestioned
authority,--a certain air of royalty reduced to its simplest form.
The face in Pictures by Pesne and others, is not beautiful or
agreeable; healthy, genuine, authoritative, is the best you can
say of it. Yet it may have been, what it is described as being,
originally handsome. High enough arched brow, rather copious
cheeks and jaws; nose smallish, inclining to be stumpy; large gray
eyes, bright with steady fire and life, often enough gloomy and
severe, but capable of jolly laughter too. Eyes "naturally with a
kind of laugh in them," says Pollnitz;--which laugh can blaze out
into fearful thunderous rage, if you give him provocation.
Especially if you lie to him; for that he hates above all things.
Look him straight in the face: he fancies he can see in your eyes,
if there is an internal mendacity in you: wherefore you must look
at him in speaking; such is his standing order.

His hair is flaxen, falling into the ash-gray or darker;
fine copious flowing hair, while he wore it natural. But it soon
got tied into clubs, in the military style; and at length it was
altogether cropped away, and replaced by brown, and at last by
white, round wigs. Which latter also, though bad wigs, became him
not amiss, under his cocked-hat and cockade, says Pollnitz.
[Pollnitz, <italic> Memoiren <end italic> (Berlin, 1791),
ii. 568.] The voice, I guess, even when not loud, was of
clangorous and penetrating, quasi-metallic nature; and I learn
expressly once, that it had a nasal quality in it. [Busching,
<italic> Beitrage, <end italic> i. 568.] His Majesty spoke through
the nose; snuffled his speech in an earnest ominously plangent
manner. In angry moments, which were frequent, it must have been--
unpleasant to listen to. For the rest, a handsome man of his
inches; conspicuously well-built in limbs and body, and delicately
finished off to the very extremities. His feet and legs, says
Pollnitz, were very fine. The hands, if he would have taken care
of them, were beautifully white; fingers long and thin; a hand
at once nimble to grasp, delicate to feel, and strong to clutch
and hold: what may be called a beautiful hand, because it is
the usefulest.

Nothing could exceed his Majesty's simplicity of habitudes.
But one loves especially in him his scrupulous attention to
cleanliness of person and of environment. He washed like a very
Mussulman, five times a day; loved cleanliness in all things, to a
superstitious extent; which trait is pleasant in the rugged man,
and indeed of a piece with the rest of his character. He is
gradually changing all his silk and other cloth room-furniture;
in his hatred of dust, he will not suffer a floor-carpet, even a
stuffed chair; but insists on having all of wood, where the dust
may be prosecuted to destruction. [Forster, i. 208.] Wife and
womankind, and those that take after them, let such have stuffing
and sofas: he, for his part, sits on mere wooden chairs;--sits,
and also thinks and acts, after the manner of a Hyperborean
Spartan, which he was. He ate heartily, but as a rough farmer and
hunter eats; country messes, good roast and boiled; despising the
French Cook, as an entity without meaning for him. His favorite
dish at dinner was bacon and greens, rightly dressed; what could
the French Cook do for such a man? He ate with rapidity, almost
with indiscriminate violence: his object not quality but quantity.
He drank too, but did not get drunk: at the Doctor's order he
could abstain; and had in later years abstained. Pollnitz praises
his fineness of complexion, the originally eminent whiteness of
his skin, which he had tanned and bronzed by hard riding and
hunting, and otherwise worse discolored by his manner of feeding
and digesting: alas, at last his waistcoat came to measure, I am
afraid to say how many Prussian ells,--a very considerable
diameter indeed! [Ib. i. 163.]

For some years after his accession he still appeared occasionally
in "burgher dress," or unmilitary clothes; "brown English coat,
yellow waistcoat" and the other indispensables. But this fashion
became rarer with him every year; and ceased altogether (say
Chronologists) about the year 1719: after which he appeared always
simply as Colonel of the Potsdam Guards (his own Lifeguard
Regiment) in simple Prussian uniform: close military coat;
blue, with red cuffs and collar, buff waistcoat and breeches;
white linen gaiters to the knee. He girt his sword about the
loins, well out of the mud; walked always with a thick bamboo in
his hand; Steady, not slow of step; with his triangular hat,
cream-white round wig (in his older days), and face tending to
purple,--the eyes looking out mere investigation, sharp swift
authority, and dangerous readiness to rebuke and set the cane in
motion:--it was so he walked abroad in this earth; and the common
run of men rather fled his approach than courted it.

For, in fact, he was dangerous; and would ask in an alarming
manner, "Who are you?" Any fantastic, much more any
suspicious-looking person, might fare the worse. An idle lounger
at the street-corner he has been known to hit over the crown;
and peremptorily despatch: "Home, Sirrah, and take to some work!"
That the Apple-women be encouraged to knit, while waiting for
custom;--encouraged and quietly constrained, and at length packed
away, and their stalls taken from them, if unconstrainable,--there
has, as we observed, an especial rescript been put forth;
very curious to read. [In Rodenbeck, <italic> Beitrage, <end
italic> p. 15.]

Dandiacal figures, nay people looking like Frenchmen, idle
flaunting women even,--better for them to be going. "Who are you?"
and if you lied or prevaricated (<italic>"Er blicke mich gerade
an, <end italic> Look me in the face, then!"), or even stumbled,
hesitated, and gave suspicion of prevaricating, it might be worse
for you. A soft answer is less effectual than a prompt clear one,
to turn away wrath. "A <italic> Candidatus Theoligiae, <end
italic> your Majesty," answered a handfast threadbare youth one
day, when questioned in this manner.--"Where from?" "Berlin, your
Majesty."--"Hm, na, the Berliners are a good-for-nothing set."
"Yes, truly, too many of them; but there are exceptions; I know
two."--"Two? which then?" "Your Majesty and myself!"--Majesty
burst into a laugh: the Candidatus was got examined by the
Consistoriums, and Authorities proper in that matter, and put
into a chaplaincy.

This King did not love the French, or their fashions, at all.
We said he dismissed the big Peruke,--put it on for the last time
at his Father's funeral, so far did filial piety go; and then
packed it aside, dismissing it, nay banishing and proscribing it,
never to appear more. The Peruke, and, as it were, all that the
Peruke symbolized. For this was a King come into the world with
quite other aims than that of wearing big perukes, and, regardless
of expense, playing burst-frog to the ox of Versailles, which
latter is itself perhaps a rather useless animal. Of Friedrich
Wilhelm's taxes upon wigs; of the old "Wig-inspectors," and the
feats they did, plucking off men's periwigs on the street, to see
if the government-stamp were there, and to discourage wiggery, at
least all but the simple scratch or useful Welsh-wig, among
mankind: of these, and of other similar things, I could speak;
but do not. This little incident, which occurred once in the
review-ground on the outskirts of Berlin, will suffice to mark his
temper in that respect. It was in the spring of 1719; our little
Fritz then six years old, who of course heard much temporary
confused commentary, direct and oblique, triumphant male laughter,
and perhaps rebellious female sighs, on occasion of such a feat.

Count Rothenburg, Prussian by birth, [Buchholz, <italic> Neueste
Preuwssisch-Brandenburgische Geschichte, <end italic> i. 28.] an
accomplished and able person in the diplomatic and other lines of
business, but much used to Paris and its ways, had appeared lately
in Berlin, as French envoy,--and, not unnaturally, in high French
costume; cocked-hat, peruke, laced coat, and the other trimmings.
He, and a group of dashing followers and adherents, were
accustomed to go about in that guise; very capable of proving
infectious to mankind. What is to be done with them? thinks the
anxious Father of his People. They were to appear at the ensuing
grand Review, as Friedrich Wilhelm understood. Whereupon Friedrich
Wilhelm took his measures in private. Dressed up, namely, his
Scavenger-Executioner people (what they call PROFOSSEN in Prussian
regiments) in an enormous exaggeration of that costume;
cocked-hats about an ell in diameter, wigs reaching to the houghs,
with other fittings to match: these, when Count Rothenburg and his
company appeared upon the ground, Friedrich Wilhelm summoned out,
with some trumpet-peal or burst of field-music; and they solemnly
crossed Count Rothenburg's field of vision; the strangest set of,
Phantasms he had seen lately. Awakening salutary reflections in
him. [Forster, i. 165; Faasmann, <italic> Leben und Thaten des
allerdurchlauchtigsten gc. Konigs von Preussen Frederici Wilhelmi
<end italic> (Hambug und Breslau, 1735), pp. 223, 319.] Fancy that
scene in History; Friedrich Wilhelm for comic-symbolic
Dramaturgist. Gods and men (or at least Houyhnhnm horses) might
have saluted it; with a Homeric laugh,--so huge and vacant is it,
with a suspicion of real humor too:--but the men were not
permitted, on parade, more than a silent grin, or general
irrepressible rustling murmur; and only the gods laughed
inextinguishably, if so disposed. The Scavenger-Executioners went
back to their place; and Count Rothenburg took a plain German
costume, so long as he continued in those parts.


Friedrich Wilhelm has a dumb rough wit and mockery, of that kind,
on many occasions; not without geniality in its Brobdignag
exaggeration and simplicity. Like a wild bear of the woods taking
his sport; with some sense of humor in the rough skin of him.
Very capable of seeing through sumptuous costumes; and respectful
of realities alone. Not in French sumptuosity, but in native
German thrift, does this King see his salvation; so as Nature
constructed him: and the world which has long lost its Spartans,
will see again an original North-German Spartan; and shriek a good
deal over him; Nature keeping her own counsel the while, and as it
were, laughing in her sleeve at the shrieks of the flunky world.
For Nature, when she makes a Spartan, means a good deal by it;
and does not expect instant applauses, but only gradual
and lasting.

"For my own part," exclaims a certain Editor once, "I perceive
well there was never yet any great Empire founded, Roman, English,
down to Prussian or Dutch, nor in fact any great mass of work got
achieved under the Sun, but it was founded even upon this
humble-looking quality of Thrift, and became achievable in virtue
of the same. Which will seem a strange doctrine, in these days of
gold-nuggets, railway-fortunes, and miraculous, sumptuosities
regardless of expense. Earnest readers are invited to consider it,
nevertheless. Though new; it is very old; and a sad meaning lies
in it to us of these times! That you have squandered in idle
fooleries, building where there was no basis, your Hundred
Thousand Sterling, your Eight Hundred Million Sterling, is to me a
comparatively small matter. You may still again become rich, if
you have at last become wise. But if you have wasted your capacity
of strenuous, devoutly valiant labor, of patience, perseverance,
self-denial, faith in the causes of effects; alas, if your once
just judgment of what is worth something and what is worth
nothing, has been wasted, and your silent steadfast reliance on
the general veracities, of yourself and of things, is no longer
there,--then indeed you have had a loss! You are, in fact, an
entirely bankrupt individual; as you will find by and by. Yes; and
though you had California in fee-simple; and could buy all the
upholsteries, groceries, funded-properties, temporary (very
temporary) landed properties of the world, at one swoop, it would
avail you nothing. Henceforth for you no harvests in the Seedfield
of this Universe, which reserves its salutary bounties, and noble
heaven-sent gifts, for quite other than you; and I would not give
a pin's value for all YOU will ever reap there. Mere imaginary
harvests, sacks of nuggets and the like; empty as the east-wind;--
with all the Demons laughing at you! Do you consider that Nature
too is a swollen flunky, hungry for veils; and can be taken in
with your sublime airs of sumptuosity, and the large balance you
actually have in Lombard Street? Go to the--General Cesspool, with
your nuggets and your ducats!"

The flunky world, much stript of its plush and fat perquisites,
accuses Friedrich Wilhelm bitterly of avarice and the cognate
vices. But it is not so; intrinsically, in the main, his procedure
is to be defined as honorable thrift,--verging towards avarice
here and there; as poor human virtues usually lean to one side or
the other! He can be magnificent enough too, and grudges no
expense, when the occasion seems worthy. If the occasion is
inevitable, and yet not quite worthy, I have known him have
recourse to strange shifts. The Czar Peter, for example, used to
be rather often in the Prussian Dominions, oftenest on business of
his own: such a man is to be royally defrayed while with us;
yet one would wish it done cheap. Posthorses, "two hundred and
eighty-seven at every station," he has from the Community; but the
rest of his expenses, from Memel all the way to Wesel? Friedrich
Wilhelm's marginal response to his FINANZ-DIRECTORIUM, requiring
orders once on that subject, runs in the following strange tenor:
"Yes, all the way (except Berlin, which I take upon myself);
and observe, you contrive to do it for 6,000 thalers (900
pounds),"--which is uncommonly cheap, about l pound per mile;--
won't allow you one other penny (<italic>nit einen Pfennig gebe
mehr dazu <end italic>); but you are (<italic> sollen Sie <end
italic>)," this is the remarkable point, "to give out in the world
that it costs me from Thirty to Forty Thousand!" [1717: Forster,
i. 213.] So that here is the Majesty of Prussia, who beyond all
men abhors lies, giving orders to tell one? Alas, yes; a kind of
lie, or fib (white fib, or even GRAY), the pinch of Thrift
compelling! But what a window into the artless inner-man of his
Majesty, even that GRAY fib;--not done by oneself, but ordered
to be done by the servant, as if that were cheaper!

"Verging upon avarice," sure enough: but, unless we are unjust and
unkind, he can by no means be described as a MISER King.
He collects what is his; gives you accurately what is yours.
For wages paid he will see work done; he will ascertain more and
more that the work done be work needful for him; and strike it
off, if not. A Spartan man, as we said,--though probably he knew
as little of the Spartans as the Spartans did of him. But Nature
is still capable of such products: if in Hellas long ages since,
why not in Brandenburg now?



Chapter V.

FRIEDRICH WILHELM'S ONE WAR.

One of Fritz's earliest strong impressions from the outer world
chanced to be of War,--so it chanced, though he had shown too
little taste that way, and could not, as yet, understand such
phenomena;--and there must have been much semi-articulate
questioning and dialoguing with Dame de Roucoulles, on his part,
about the matter now going on.

In the year 1715, little Fritz's third year, came grand doings,
not of drill only, but of actual war and fighting: the "Stralsund
Expedition," Friedrich Wilhelm's one feat in that kind. Huge rumor
of which fills naturally the maternal heart, the Berlin Palace
drawing-rooms; and occupies, with new vivid interests, all
imaginations young and old. For the actual battledrums are now
beating, the big cannon-wains are creaking under way; and military
men take farewell, and march, tramp, tramp; Majesty in
grenadier-guard uniform at their head: horse, foot and artillery;
northward to Stralsund on the Baltic shore, where a terrible human
Lion has taken up his lair lately. Charles XII. of Sweden, namely;
he has broken out of Turkish Bender or Demotica, and ended his
obstinate torpor, at last; has ridden fourteen or sixteen days,
he and a groom or two, through desolate steppes and mountain
wildernesses, through crowded dangerous cities;--"came by Vienna
and by Cassel, then through Pommern;" leaving his "royal train of
two thousand persons" to follow at its leisure. He, for his part,
has ridden without pause, forward, ever forward, in darkest
incognito, the indefatigable man;--and finally, on Old-Hallowmas
Eve (22d-11th November, 1714), far in the night, a Horseman, with
two others still following him, travel-splashed, and "white with
snow," drew bridle at the gate of Stralsund; and, to the surprise
of the Swedish sentinel there, demanded instant admission to the
Governor. The Governor, at first a little surly of humor, saw
gradually how it was; sprang out of bed, and embraced the knees of
the snowy man; Stralsund in general sprang out of bed, and
illuminated itself, that same Hallow-Eve:--and in brief, Charles
XII., after five years of eclipse, has reappeared upon the stage
of things; and menaces the world, in his old fashion, from that
City. From which it becomes urgent to many parties, and at last to
Friedrich Wilhelm himself, that he be dislodged.

The root of this Stralsund story belongs to the former reign, as
did the grand apparition of Charles XII. on the theatre of
European History, and the terror and astonishment he created
there. He is now thirty-three years old; and only the winding up,
both of him and of the Stralsund story, falls within our present
field. Fifteen years ago, it was like the bursting of a cataract
of bomb-shells in a dull ball-room, the sudden appearance of this
young fighting Swede among the luxurious Kings and Kinglets of the
North, all lounging about and languidly minuetting in that manner,
regardless of expense! Friedrich IV. of Denmark rejoicing over red
wine; August the Strong gradually producing his "three hundred and
fifty-four bastards;" [<italic> Memoires de Bareith <end italic>
(Wilhelmina's Book, Londres, 1812), i. 111.] these and other
neighbors had confidently stept in, on various pretexts; thinking
to help themselves from the young man's properties, who was still
a minor; when the young minor suddenly developed himself as a
major and maximus, and turned out to be such a Fire-King
among them!

In consequence of which there had been no end of Northern
troubles; and all through the Louis-Fourteenth or Marlborough
grand "Succession War," a special "Northern War" had burnt or
smouldered on its own score; Swedes VERSUS Saxons, Russians and
Danes, bickering in weary intricate contest, and keeping those
Northern regions in smoke if not on fire. Charles XII., for the
last five years (ever since Pultawa, and the summer of 1709), had
lain obstinately dormant in Turkey; urging the Turks to destroy
Czar Peter. Which they absolutely could not, though they now and
then tried; and Viziers not a few lost their heads in consequence.
Charles lay sullenly dormant; Danes meanwhile operating upon his
Holstein interests and adjoining territories; Saxons, Russians,
battering continually at Swedish Pommern, continually marching
thither, and then marching home again, without success,--always
through the Brandenburg Territory, as they needs must.
Which latter circumstance Friedrich Wilhelm, while yet only
Crown-Prince, had seen with natural displeasure, could that
have helped it. But Charles XII. would not yield a whit;
sent orders peremptorily, from his bed at Bender or Demotica,
that there must be no surrender. Neither could the sluggish enemy
compel surrender.

So that, at length, it had grown a feeble wearisome welter of
inextricable strifes, with worn-out combatants, exhausted of all
but their animosity; and seemed as if it would never end.
Inveterate ineffective war; ruinous to all good interests in those
parts. What miseries had Holstein from it, which last to our own
day! Mecklenburg also it involved in sore troubles, which lasted
long enough, as we shall see. But Brandenburg, above all, may be
impatient; Brandenburg, which has no business with it except that
of unlucky neighborhood. One of Friedrich Wilhelm's very first
operations, as King, was to end this ugly state of matters, which
he had witnessed with impatience, as Prince, for a long while.

He had hailed even the Treaty of Utrecht with welcome, in hopes it
might at least end these Northern brabbles. This the Treaty of
Utrecht tried to do, but could not: however, it gave him back his
Prussian Fighting Men; which he has already increased by six
regiments, raised, we may perceive, on the ruins of his late
court-flunkies and dismissed goldsticks;--with these Friedrich
Wilhelm will try to end it himself. These he at once ordered to
form a Camp on his frontier, close to that theatre of contest;
and signified now with emphasis, in the beginning of 1713, that he
decidedly wished there were peace in those Pommern regions.
Negotiations in consequence; [10th June, 1713: Buchholz, i. 21.]
very wide negotiations, Louis XIV. and the Kaiser lending hand, to
pacify these fighting Northern Kings and their Czar: at length the
Holstein Government, representing their sworn ally, Charles XII.,
on the occasion, made an offer which seemed promising.
They proposed that, Stettin and its dependencies, the strong
frontier Town, and, as it were, key of Swedish Pommern, should be
evacuated by the Swedes, and be garrisoned by neutral troops,
Prussians and Holsteiners in equal number; which neutral troops
shall prohibit any hostile attack of Pommern from without, Sweden
engaging not to make any attack through Pommern from within.
That will be as good as peace in Pommern, till we get a general
Swedish Peace. With which Friedrich Wilhelm gladly complies.
[22d June, 1713: Buchholz, i. 21.]

Unhappily, however, the Swedish Commandant in Stettin would not
give up the place, on any representative or secondary authority;
not without an express order in his King's own hand. Which, as his
King was far away, in abstruse Turkish circumstances and
localities, could not be had at the moment; and involved new
difficulties and uncertainties, new delay which might itself be
fatal. The end was, the Russians and Saxons had to cannonade the
man out by regular siege: they then gave up the Town to Prussia
and Holstein; but required first to be paid their expenses
incurred in sieging it,--400,000 thalers, as they computed and
demonstrated, or some where about 60,000 pounds of our money.

Friedrich Wilhelm paid the money (Holstein not having a groschen);
took possession of the Town, and dependent towns and forts;
intending well to keep them till repaid. This was in October,
1713; and ever since, there has been actual tranquillity in those
parts: the embers of the Northern War may still burn or smoulder
elsewhere, but here they are quite extinct. At first, it was a
joint possession of Stettin, Holsteiners and Prussians in equal
number; and if Friedrich Wilhelm had been sure of his money, so it
would have continued. But the Holsteiners had paid nothing;
Charles XII's sanction never could be expressly got, and the
Holsteiners were mere dependents of his. Better to increase our
Prussian force, by degrees; and, in some good way, with a minimum
of violence, get the Holsteiners squeezed out of Stettin:
Friedrich Wilhelm has so ordered and contrived. The Prussian force
having now gradually increased to double in this important
garrison, the Holsteiners are quietly disarmed, one night, and
ordered to depart, under penalties;--which was done. Holding such
a pawn-ticket as Stettin, buttoned in our own pocket, we count now
on being paid our 60,000 pounds before parting with it.

Matters turned out as Friedrich Wilhelm had dreaded they might.
Here is Charles XII. come back; inflexible as cold Swedish iron;
will not hear of any Treaty dealing with his properties in that
manner: Is he a bankrupt, then, that you will sell his towns by
auction? Charles does not, at heart, believe that Friedrich
Wilhelm ever really paid the 60,000 pounds Charles demands, for
his own part, to have, his own Swedish Town of Stettin restored to
him; and has not the least intention, or indeed ability, to pay
money. Vain to answer: "Stettin, for the present, is not a Swedish
Town; it is a Prussian Pawn-ticket!"--There was much negotiation,
correspondence; Louis XIV. and the Kaiser stepping in again to
produce settlement. To no purpose. Louis, gallant old Bankrupt,
tried hard to take Charles's part with effect. But he had,
himself, no money now; could only try finessing by ambassadors,
try a little menacing by them; neither of which profited.
Friedrich Wilhelm, wanting only peace on his borders, after
fifteen years of extraneous uproar there, has paid 60,000 pounds
in hard cash to have it: repay him that sum, with promise of peace
on his borders, he will then quit Stettin; till then not.
Big words from a French Ambassador in big wig, will not suffice:
"Bullying goes for nothing (<italic> Bange machen gilt nicht <end
italic>),"--the thing covenanted for will need to be done!
Poor Louis the Great, whom we now call "BANKRUPT-Great," died
while these affairs were pending; while Charles, his ally, was
arguing and battling against all the world, with only a
grandiloquent Ambassador to help him from Louis. <italic>"J'ai
trop aime la guerre," <end italic> said Louis at his death,
addressing a new small Louis (five years old), his great-grandson
and successor: "I have been too fond of war; do not imitate me in
that, <italic> ne m'imitez pas en cela." <end italic> [1st
September, 1715.] Which counsel also, as we shall see, was
considerably lost in air.

Friedrich Wilhelm had a true personal regard for Charles XII., a
man made in many respects after his own heart; and would fain have
persuaded him into softer behavior. But it was to no purpose.
Charles would not listen to reasons of policy; or believe that his
estate was bankrupt, or that his towns could be put in pawn.
Danes, Saxons, Russians, even George I. of England (George-having
just bought, of the Danish King, who had got hold of it, a great
Hanover bargain, Bremen and Verden, on cheap terms, from the
quasi-bankrupt estate of poor Charles),--have to combine against
him, and see to put him down. Among whom Prussia, at length
actually attacked by Charles in the Stettin regions, has
reluctantly to take the lead in that repressive movement. On the
28th of April, 1715, Friedrich Wilhelm declares war against
Charles; is already on march, with a great force, towards Stettin,
to coerce and repress said Charles. No help for it, so sore as it
goes against us: "Why will the very King whom I most respect
compel me to be his enemy?" said Friedrich Wilhelm. [<italic>
OEuvres de Frederic (Histoire de Brandebourg), <end italic>
i. 132; Buchholz, i. 28.]

One of Friedrich Wilhelm's originalities is his farewell Order and
Instruction, to his three chief Ministers, on this occasion.
Ilgen, Dohna, Prinzen, tacit dusky figures, whom we meet in
Prussian Books, and never gain the least idea of, except as of
grim, rather cunning, most reserved antiquarlan gentlemen,--a kind
of human iron-safes, solemnly filled (under triple and quadruple
patent-locks) with what, alas, has now all grown waste-paper, dust
and cobweb, to us:--these three reserved cunning Gentlemen are to
keep a thrice-watchful eye on all subordinate boards and persons,
and see well that nobody nod or do amiss. Brief weekly report to
his Majesty will be expected; staffettes, should cases of hot
haste occur: any questions of yours are "to be put on a sheet of
paper folded down, to which I can write marginalia:" if nothing
particular is passing, "NIT SCHREIBEN, you don't write." Pay out
no money, except what falls due by the Books; none;--if an
extraordinary case for payment arise, consult my Wife, and she
must sign her order for it. Generally in matters of any moment,
consult my Wife; but her only, "except her and the Privy
Councillors, no mortal is to poke into my affairs:" I say no
mortal, "SONST KEIN MENSCH." 

"My Wife shall be told of all things," he says elsewhere, "and
counsel asked of her." The rugged Paterfamilias, but the human
one! "And as I am a man," continues he, "and may be shot dead,
I command you and all to take care of Fritz (FUR FRITZ ZU SORGEN),
as God shall reward you. And I give you all, Wife to begin with,
my curse (MEINEN PLUCH), that God may punish you in Time and
Eternity, if you do not, after my death,"--do what, O Heavens?--
bury me in the vault of the Schlosskirche," Palace-Church at
Berlin! "And you shall make no grand to-do (KEIN FESTIN) on the
occasion. On your body and life, no festivals and ceremonials,
except that the regiments one after the other fire a volley over
me." Is not this an ursine man-of-genius, in some sort, as we once
defined him? He adds suddenly, and concludes: "I am assured you
will manage everything with all the exactness in the world;
for which I shall ever zealously, as long as I live, be your
friend." [26th April, 1715: Cosmars und Klaproths <italic>
Staatsrath, <end italic> s. 223 (in Stenzel, iii. 269). Russians,
Saxons affected to intend joining Friedrich Wilhelm in his Pommern
Expedition; and of the latter there did, under a so-called
Field-Marshal von Wackerbarth, of high plumes and titles, some
four thousand--of whom only Colonel von Seckendorf, commanding one
of the horse-regiments, is remarkable to us--come and serve.
The rest, and all the Russians, he was as well pleased to have at
a distance. Some sixteen thousand Danes joined him, too, with the
King of Denmark at their head; very furious, all, against the
Swedish-iron Hero; but they were remarked to do almost no real
service, except at sea a little against the Swedish ships.
George I. also had a fleet in the Baltic; but only "to protect
English commerce." On the whole, the Siege of Stralsund, to which
the Campaign pretty soon reduced itself, was done mainly by
Friedrich Wilhelm. He stayed two months in Stettin, getting all
his preliminaries completed; his good Queen, Wife "Feekin," was
with him for some time, I know not whether now or afterwards.
In the end of June, he issued from Stettin; took the interjacent
outpost places; and then opened ground before Stralsund, where, in
a few days more, the Danes joined him. It was now the middle of
July: a combined Army of well-nigh forty thousand against Charles;
who, to man his works, musters about the fourth part of that
number. [Pauli, viii. 85-101; Buchholz, i. 31-39; Forster,
ii. 34-39; Stenzel, iii. 272-218.]


Stralsund, with its outer lines and inner, with its marshes,
ditches, ramparts and abundant cannon to them, and leaning, one
side of it, on the deep sea, which Swedish ships command as yet,
is very strong. Wallenstein, we know, once tried it with furious
assault, with bombardment, sap and storm; swore he would have it,
"though it hung by a chain from Heaven;" but could not get it,
after all his volcanic raging; and was driven away, partly by the
Swedes and armed Townsfolk, chiefly by the marsh-fevers and
continuous rains. Stralsund has been taken, since that, by
Prussian sieging; as old men, from the Great Elector's time, still
remember. [lOth-15th October, 1678 (Pauli, v. 203, 205).]
To Louis Fourteenth's menacing Ambassador, Friedrich Wilhelm
seems to intimate that indeed big bullying words will not take it,
but that Prussian guns and men, on a just ground, still may.

The details of this Siege of Stralsund are all on record, and had
once a certain fame in the world; but, except as a distant echo,
must not concern us here. It lasted till midwinter, under
continual fierce counter-movements and desperate sallies from the
Swedish Lion, standing at bay there against all the world.
But Friedrich Wilhelm was vigilance itself; and he had his
Anhalt-Dessaus with him, his Borcks, Buddenbrocks, Finkensteins,
veteran men and captains, who had learned their art under
Marlborough and Eugene. The Lion King's fierce sallies, and
desperate valor, could not avail. Point after point was lost for
him. Koppen, a Prussian Lieutenant-Colonel, native to the place,
who has bathed in those waters in his youth, remembers that, by
wading to the chin, you could get round the extremity of Charles's
main outer line. Koppen states his project, gets it approved of;--
wades accordingly, with a select party, under cloud of night
(4th of November, eve of Gunpowder-day, a most cold-hot job);
other ranked Prussian battalions awaiting intently outside, with
shouldered firelock, invisible in the dark; what will become of
him. Koppen wades successfully; seizes the first battery of said
line,--masters said line with its batteries, the outside
battalions and he. Irrepressibly, with horrible uproar from
without and from within; the flying Swedes scarcely getting
up the Town drawbridge, as he chased them. That important line
is lost to Charles.

Next they took the Isle of Rugen from him, which shuts up the
harbor. Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau, our rugged friend, in Danish
boats, which were but ill navigated, contrives, about a week after
that Koppen feat, to effect a landing-on Rugen at nightfall;
beats off the weak Swedish party;--entrenches, palisades himself
to the teeth, and lies down under arms. That latter was a wise
precaution. For, about four in the morning, Charles comes in
person, with eight pieces of cannon and four thousand horse and
foot: Charles is struck with amazement at the palisade and ditch
("MEIN GOTT, who would have expected this!" he was heard
murmuring); dashes, like a fire-flood, against ditch and palisade;
tears at the pales himself, which prove impregnable to his cannon
and him. He storms and rages forward, again and again, now here,
now there; but is met everywhere by steady deadly musketry;
and has to retire, fruitless, about daybreak, himself wounded, and
leaving his eight cannons, and four hundred slain.

Poor Charles, there had been no sleep for him that night, and
little for very many nights: "on getting to horse, on the shore at
Stralsund, he fainted repeatedly; fell out of one faint into
another; but such was his rage, he always recovered himself, and
got on horseback again." [Buchholz, i. 36.] Poor Charles: a bit of
right royal Swedish-German stuff, after his kind; and tragically
ill bested now at last! This is his exit he is now making,--still
in a consistent manner. It is fifteen years now since he waded
ashore at Copenhagen, and first heard the bullets whistle round
him. Since which time, what a course has he run; crashing athwart
all manner of ranked armies, diplomatic combinations, right
onward, like a cannon-ball; tearing off many solemn wigs in those
Northern parts, and scattering them upon the winds,--even as he
did his own full-bottom wig, impatiently, on that first day at
Copenhagen, tiding it unfurthersome for actual business in batt1e.
[Kohler, <italic> Munzbelustigungen, <end italic> xiv. 213.]

In about a month hence, the last important hornwork is forced;
Charles, himself seen fiercely fighting on the place, is swept
back from his last hornwork; and the general storm, now altogether
irresistible, is evidently at hand. On entreaty from his
followers, entreaty often renewed, with tears even (it is said)
and on bended knees, Charles at last consents to go. He left no
orders for surrender; would not name the word; "left only
ambiguous vague orders." But on the 19th December, 1715, he does
actually depart; gets on board a little boat, towards a Swedish
frigate, which is lying above a mile out; the whole road to which,
between Rugen and the mainland, is now solid ice, and has to be
cut as he proceeds. This slow operation, which lasted all day, was
visible, and its meaning well known, in the besiegers' lines.
The King of Denmark saw it; and brought a battery to bear upon it;
his thought had always been, that Charles should be captured or
killed in Stralsund, and not allowed to get away. Friedrich
Wilhelm was of quite another mind, and had even used secret
influences to that effect; eager that Charles should escape.
It is said, he remonstrated very passionately with the Danish King
and this battery of his; nay, some add, since remonstrances did
not avail, and the battery still threatened to fire, Friedrich
Wilhelm drew up a Prussian regiment or two at the muzzles of it,
and said, You shall shoot us first, then. [Buchholz, p. 138.]
Which is a pleasant myth at least; and symbolical of what the
reality was.

Charles reached his frigate about nightfall, but made little way
from the place, owing to defect of wind. They say, he even heard
the chamade beating in Stralsund next day, and that a Danish
frigate had nearly taken him; both which statements are perhaps
also a little mythical. Certain only that he vanished at this
point into Scandinavia; and general Europe never saw him more.
Vanished into a cloud of untenable schemes, guided by Alberoni,
Baron Gortz and others; wild schemes, financial, diplomatic,
warlike, nothing not chimerical in them but his own unquenchable
real energy;--and found his death (by assassination, as appears)
in the trenches of Frederickshall, among the Norway Hills, one
winter night, three years hence. Assassination instigated by the
Swedish Official Persons, it is thought. The bullet passed through
both his temples; he had clapt his hand upon the hilt of his
sword, and was found leant against the parapet, in that attitude,
--gone upon a long march now. So vanished Charles Twelfth;
the distressed Official Persons and Nobility exploding upon him in
that rather damnable way,--anxious to slip their muzzles at any
cost whatever. A man of antique character; true as a child,
simple, even bashful, and of a strength and valor rarely exampled
among men. Open-hearted Antique populations would have much
worshipped such an Appearance;--Voltaire, too, for the artificial
Moderns, has made a myth of him, of another type; one of those
impossible cast-iron gentlemen, heroically mad, such as they show
in the Playhouses, pleasant but not profitable, to an undiscerning
Pub1ic. [See Adlerfeld (<italic> Military History of Charles XII.
<end italic> London, 1740, 3 vols., "from the Swedish," through
the French) and Kohler (<italic> Munzbelustigungen, <end italic>
ubi supra), for some authentic traits of his life and him.]
The last of the Swedish Kings died in this way; and the unmuzzled
Official Persons have not made much of kinging it in his stead.
Charles died; and, as we may say, took the life of Sweden along
with him; for it has never shone among the Nations since, or been
much worth mentioning, except for its misfortunes, spasmodic
impotences and unwisdoms.

Stralsund instantly beat the chamade, as we heard; and all was
surrender and subjection in those regions. Surrender; not yet
pacification, not while Charles lived; nor for half a century
after his death, could Mecklenburg, Holstein-Gottorp, and other
his confederates, escape a sad coil of calamities bequeathed by
him to them. Friedrich Wilhelm returned to Berlin, victorious from
his first, which was also his last Prussian War, in January, 1716;
and was doubtless a happy man, NOT "to be buried in the
Schlosskirche (under penalty of God's curse)," but to find his
little Fritz and Feekin, and all the world, merry to see him, and
all things put square again, abroad as at home. He forbade the
"triumphal entry" which Berlin was preparing for him; entered
privately; and ordered a thanksgiving sermon in all the churches
next Sunday.


THE DEVIL IN HARNESS: CREUTZ THE FINANCE-MINISTER.

In the King's absence nothing particular had occurred,--except
indeed the walking of a dreadful Spectre, three nights over, in
the corridors of the Palace at Berlin; past the doors where our
little Prince and Wilhelmina slept: bringing with it not airs from
Heaven, we may fear, but blasts from the Other place! The stalwart
sentries shook in their paces, and became "half-dead" from terror.
"A horrible noise, one night," says Wilhelmina, "when all were
buried in sleep: all the world started up, thinking it was fire;
but they were much surprised to find that it was a Spectre."
Evident Spectre, seen to pass this way, "and glide along that
gallery, as if towards the apartments of the Queen's Ladies."
Captain of the Guard could find nothing in that gallery, or
anywhere, and withdrew again:--but lo, it returns the way it went!
Stalwart sentries were found melted into actual deliquium of
swooning, as the Preternatural swept by this second time.
"They said, It was the Devil in person; raised by Swedish wizards
to kill the Prince-Royal." [Wilhelmina, <italic> Memoires de
Bareith, i. 18.]l Poor Prince-Royal; sleeping sound, we hope;
little more than three years old at this time, and knowing nothing
of it!--All Berlin talked of the affair. People dreaded it might
be a "Spectre" of Swedish tendencies; aiming to burn the Palace,
spirit off the Royal Children, and do one knew not what?

Not that at all, by any means! The Captain of the Guard,
reinforcing himself to defiance even of the Preternatural, does,
on the third or fourth apparition, clutch the Spectre; finds him
to be--a prowling Scullion of the Palace, employed here he will
not say how; who is straightway locked in prison, and so exorcised
at least. Exorcism is perfect; but Berlin is left guessing as to
the rest,--secret of it discoverable only by the Queen's Majesty
and some few most interior parties. To the following effect.

Spectre-Scullion, it turns out, had been employed by Grumkow, as
spy upon one of the Queen's Maids of Honor,--suspected by him to
be a No-maid of Dishonor, and of ill intentions too,--who lodges
in that part of the Palace: of whom Herr Grumkow wishes intensely
to know, "Has she an intrigue with Creutz the new
Finance-Minister, or has she not?" "Has, beyond doubt!" the
Spectre-Scullion hopes he has discovered, before exorcism.
Upon which Grumkow, essentially illuminated as to the required
particular, manages to get the Spectre-Scullion loose again, not
quite hanged; glozing the matter off to his Majesty on his return:
for the rest, ruins entirely the Creutz speculation; and has the
No-maid called of Honor--with whom Creutz thought to have seduced
the young King also, and made the young King amenable--dismissed
from Court in a peremptory irrefragable manner. This is the
secret of the Spectre-Scullion, fully revealed by Wilhelmina
many years after.

This one short glance into the Satan's Invisible-World of the
Berlin Palace, we could not but afford the reader, when an actual
Goblin of it happened to be walking in our neighborhood. Such an
Invisible-World of Satan exists in most human Houses, and in all
human Palaces;--with its imps, familiar demons, spies,
go-betweens, and industrious bad-angels, continually mounting and
descending by THEIR Jacob's-Ladder, or Palace Backstairs:
operated upon by Conjurers of the Grumkow-Creutz or other sorts.
Tyrannous Mamsell Leti, [Leti, Governess to Wilhelmina, but soon
dismissed for insolent cruelty and other bad conduct, was daughter
of that Gregorio Leti ("Protestant Italian Refugee,"
"Historiographer of Amsterdam," &c. &c.), who once had a pension
in this country; and who wrote History-Books, a <italic> Life of
Cromwell <end italic> one of them, so regardless of the difference
between true and false.] treacherous Mamsell Ramen, valet-surgeon
Eversmann, and plenty more: readers of Wilhelmina's Book are too
well acquainted with them. Nor are expert Conjurers wanting;
capable to work strange feats with so plastic an element as
Friedrich Wilhelm's mind. Let this one short glimpse of such
Subterranean World be sufficient indication to the reader's fancy.

Creutz was not dismissed, as some people had expected he might be.
Creutz continues Finance-Minister; makes a great figure in the
fashionable Berlin world in these coming years, and is much talked
of in the old Books,--though, as he works mostly underground, and
merely does budgets and finance-matters with extreme talent and
success, we shall hope to hear almost nothing more of him.
Majesty, while Crown-Prince, when he first got his regiment from
Papa, had found this Creutz "Auditor" in it; a poor but handsome
fellow, with perhaps seven shillings a week to live upon; but with
such a talent for arranging, for reckoning and recording, in brief
for controlling finance, as more and more charmed the royal mind.
[Mauvillon ("Elder Mauvillon," ANONYMOUS), <italic> Histoire de
Frederic Guillaume I., <end italic> par M. de M--(Amsterdam et
Leipzig, 1741), i. 47. A vague flimsy compilation;--gives abundant
"State-Papers" (to such as want them), and echoes of old Newspaper
rumor. Very copious on Creutz.]

One of Majesty's first acts was to appoint him Finance-Minister;
[4th May, 1713: Preuss, i. 349. n.] and there he continued steady,
not to be overset by little flaws of wind like this of the
Spectre-Scullion's raising. It is certain he did, himself, become
rich; and helped well to make his Majesty so. We are to fancy him
his Majesty's bottle-holder in that battle with the Finance
Nightmares and Imbroglios, when so much had to be subjugated, and
drilled into step, in that department. Evidently a long-headed
cunning fellow, much of the Grumkow type;--standing very low in
Wilhelmina's judgment; and ill-seen, when not avoidable
altogether, by the Queen's Majesty. "The man was a poor Country
Bailiff's (AMTMANN'S, kind of Tax-manager's) son: from Auditor of
a regiment," Papa's own regiment, "he had risen to be Director of
Finance, and a Minister of State. His soul was as low as his
birth; it was an assemblage of all the vices," [Wilhelmina,
i. 16.] says Wilhelmina, in the language of exaggeration.--Let him
stand by his budgets; keep well out of Wilhelmina's and the
Queen's way;--and very especially beware of coming on Grumkow's
field again.



Chapter VI.

THE LITTLE DRUMMER.

This Siege of Stralsund, the last military scene of Charles XII.,
and the FIRST ever practically heard of by our little Fritz, who
is now getting into his fourth year, and must have thought a great
deal about it in his little head,--Papa and even Mamma being
absent on it, and such a marching and rumoring going on all round
him,--proved to be otherwise of some importance to little Fritz.

Most of his Tutors were picked up by the careful Papa in this
Stralsund business. Duhan de Jandun, a young French gentleman,
family-tutor to General Count Dohna (a cousin of our Minister
Dohna's), but fonder of fighting than of teaching grammar;
whom Friedrich Wilhelm found doing soldier's work in the trenches,
and liked the ways of; he, as the foundation-stone of tutorage, is
to be first mentioned. And then Count Fink von Finkenstein, a
distinguished veteran, high in command (of whose qualities as
Head-Tutor, or occasional travelling guardian Friedrich Wilhelm
had experience in his own young days [<italic> Biographisches
Lexikon aaler Helden und Militairpersonen, welche sich in
Preussischen Diensten berumht gemacht haben <end italic> (4 vols.
Berlin, 1788), i. 418, ? Finkenatein.--A praiseworthy, modest,
highly correct Book, of its kind; which we shall, in future, call
<italic> Militair-Lexikon, <end italic> when referring to it.]);
and Lieutenant-Colonel Kalkstein, a prisoner-of-war from the
Swedish side, whom Friedrich Wilhelm, judging well of him,
adopts into his own service with this view: these three come all
from Stralsund Siege; and were of vital moment to our little
Fritz in the subsequent time. Colonel Seckendorf, again, who had
a command in the four thousand Saxons here, and refreshed into
intimacy a transient old acquaintance with Friedrich Wilhelm,--
is not he too of terrible importance to Fritz and him? As we shall
see in time!--

For the rest, here is another little incident. We said it had been
a disappointment to Papa that his little Fritz showed almost no
appetite for soldiering, but found other sights more interesting
to him than the drill-ground. Sympathize, then, with the earnest
Papa, as he returns home one afternoon,--date not given, but to
all appearance of that year 1715, when there was such
war-rumoring, and marching towards Stralsund;--and found the
little Fritz, with Wilhelmina looking over him, strutting about,
and assiduously beating a little drum.

The paternal heart ran over with glad fondness, invoking Heaven to
confirm the omen. Mother was told of it; the phenomenon was talked
of,--beautifulest, hopefulest of little drummers. Painter Pesne, a
French Immigrant, or Importee, of the last reign, a man of great
skill with his brush, whom History yet thanks on several
occasions, was sent for; or he heard of the incident, and
volunteered his services. A Portrait of little Fritz drumming,
with Wilhelmina looking on; to which, probably for the sake of
color and pictorial effect, a Blackamoor, aside with parasol in
hand, grinning approbation, has been added,--was sketched, and
dexterously worked out in oil, by Painter Pesne. Picture approved
by mankind there and then. And it still hangs on the wall, in a
perfect state, in Charlottenburg Palace; where the judicious
tourist may see it without difficulty, and institute reflections
on it.

A really graceful little Picture; and certainly, to Prussian men,
not without weight of meaning. Nor perhaps to Picture-Collectors
and Cognoscenti generally, of whatever couutry,--if they could
forget, for a moment, the correggiosity of Correggio, and the
learned babble of the Sale-room and varnishing Auctioneer;
and think, "Why it is, probably, that Pictures exist in this
world, and to what end the divine art of Painting was bestowed, by
the earnest gods, upon poor mankind?" I could advise it, once, for
a little! Flaying of Saint Bartholomew, Rape of Europa, Rape of
the Sabines, Piping and Amours of goat-footed Pan, Romulus suckled
by the Wolf: all this, and much else of fabulous, distant,
unimportant, not to say impossible, ugly and unworthy, shall pass
without undue severity of criticism, in a Household of such
opulence as ours, where much goes to waste, and where things are
not on an earnest footing for this long while past! As Created
Objects, or as Phantasms of such, pictorially done, all this shall
have much worth, or shall have little. But I say, Here withal is
one not phantasmal; of indisputable certainty, home-grown, just
commencing business, who carried it far!

Fritz is still, if not in "long-clothes," at least in longish and
flowing clothes, of the petticoat sort, which look as of dark-blue
velvet, very simple, pretty and appropriate; in a cap of the same;
has a short raven's feather in the cap; and looks up, with a face
and eyes full of beautiful vivacity and child's enthusiasm, one of
the beautifulest little figures, while the little drum responds to
his bits of drumsticks. Sister Wilhelmina, taller by some three
years, looks on in pretty marching attitude, and with a graver 
smile. Blackamoor, and accompaniments elegant enough; and finally
the figure of a grenadier, on guard, seen far off through an
opening,--make up the background.

We have engravings of this Picture; which are of clumsy poor
quality, and misrepresent it much: an excellent Copy in oil, what
might be called almost a fac-simile and the perfection of a Copy,
is now (1854) in Lord Ashburton's Collection here in England.
In the Berlin Galleries,--which are made up, like other Galleries,
of goat-footed Pan, Europa's Bull, Romulus's She-Wolf, and the
correggiosity of Correggio; and contain, for instance, no Portrait
of Frederick the Great; no Likenesses at all, or next to none at
all, of the noble series of Human Realities, or of any part of
them, who have sprung not from the idle brains of dreaming
Dilettanti, but from the Head of God Almighty, to make this poor
authentic Earth a little memorable for us, and to do a little work
that may be eternal there:--in those expensive Halls of "High Art"
at Berlin, there were, to my experience, few Pictures more
agreeable than this of Pesne's. Welcome, like one tiny islet of
Reality amid the shoreless sea of Phantasms, to the reflective
mind, seriously loving and seeking what is worthy and memorable,
seriously hating and avoiding what is the reverse, and intent not
to play the dilettante in this world.

The same Pesne, an excellent Artist, has painted Friedrich as
Prince-Royal: a beautiful young man with MOIST-looking
enthusiastic eyes of extraordinary brilliancy, smooth oval face;
considerably resembling his Mother. After which period, authentic
Pictures of Friedrich are sought for to little purpose. For it
seems he never sat to any Painter, in his reigning days; and the
Prussian Chodowiecki, [Pronounce KODOV-YETSKI;--and endeavor to
make some acquaintance with this "Prussian Hogarth," who has real
worth and originality.] Saxon Graff, English Cunningham had to
pick up his physiognomy from the distance, intermittently, as they
could. Nor is Rauch's grand equestrian Sculpture a thing to be
believed, or perhaps pretending much to be so. The commonly
received Portrait of Friedrich, which all German limners can draw
at once,--the cocked-hat, big eyes and alert air, reminding you of
some uncommonly brisk Invalid Drill-sergeant or Greenwich
Pensioner, as much as of a Royai Hero,--is nothing but a general
extract and average of all the faces of Friedrich, such as has
been tacitly agreed upon; and is definable as a received
pictorial-myth, by no means as a fact, or credible resemblance
of life.

But enough now of Pictures. This of the Little Drummer, the
painting and the thing painted which remain to us, may be taken as
Friedrich's first appearance on the stage of the world;
and welcomed accordingly. It is one of the very few visualities or
definite certainties we can lay hold of, in those young years of
his, and bring conclusively home to our imagination, out of the

waste Prussian dust-clouds of uninstructive garrulity which
pretend to record them for us. Whether it came into existence as a
shadowy emanation from the Stralsund Expedition, can only be
matter of conjecture. To judge by size, these figures must have
been painted about the year 1715; Fritz some three or four years
old, his sister Wilhelmina seven.

It remains only to be intimated, that Friedrich Wilhelm, for his
part, had got all he claimed from this Expedition: namely, Stettin
with the dependent Towns, and quietness in Pommern. Stettin was,
from of old, the capital of his own part of Pommern; thrown in
along with the other parts of Pommern, and given to Sweden (from
sheer necessity, it was avowed), at the Peace of Westphalia, sixty
years ago or more:--and now, by good chance, it has come back.
Wait another hundred years, and perhaps Swedish Pommern altogether
will come back! But from all this Friedrich Wilhelm is still far.
Stettin and quiet are all he dreams of demanding there.

Stralsund he did not reckon his; left it with the Danes, to hold
in pawn till some general Treaty. Nor was there farther outbreak
of war in those regions; though actual Treaty of Peace did not
come till 1720, and make matters sure. It was the new Queen of
Sweden, Ulrique Eleonora (Charles's younger Sister, wedded to the
young Landgraf of Hessen-Cassel),--much aided by an English
Envoy,--who made this Peace with Friedrich Wilhelm. A young
English Envoy, called Lord Carteret, was very helpful in this
matter; one of his first feats in the diplomatic world. For which
Peace, [Stockholm, 21st January, 1720: in Mauvillon (i. 380-417)
the Document itself at large.] Friedrich Wilhelm was so thankful,
good pacific armed-man, that happening to have a Daughter born to
him just about that time, he gave the little creature her Swedish
Majesty's name; a new "Ulrique," who grew to proper stature, and
became notable in Sweden, herself, by and by. [Louisa Ulrique,
born 24th July, 1720; Queen of Sweden in time coming.]



Chapter VII.

TRANSIT OF CZAR PETER.

In the Autumn of 1717, Peter the Great, coming home from his
celebrated French journey, paid Friedrich Wilhelm a visit;
and passed four days at Berlin. Of which let us give one glimpse,
if we can with brevity.

Friedrich Wilhelm and the Czar, like in several points, though so
dissimilar in others, had always a certain regard for one another;
and at this time, they had been brought into closer intercourse by
their common peril from Charles XII., ever since that Stralsund
business. The peril was real, especially with a Gortz and Alberoni
putting hand to it; and the alarm, the rumor, and uncertainty were
great in those years. The wounded Lion driven indignant into his
lair, with Plotting Artists now operating upon the rage of the
noble animal: who knows what spring he will next take? George I.
had a fleet cruising in the Baltic Sounds, and again a fleet;--
paying, in that oblique way, for Bremen and Verden; which were
got, otherwise, such a bargain to his Hanover. Czar Peter had
marched an Army into Denmark; united Russians and Danes count
fifty thousand there; for a conjunct invasion, and probable
destruction, of Sweden: but that came to nothing; Charles looking
across upon it too dangerously, "visible in clear weather over
from the Danish side." [1716: Fassmann, p. 171.] So Peter's troops
have gone home again; Denmark too glad to get them away.
Perhaps they would have stayed in Denmark altogether; much liking
the green pastures and convenient situation,--had not Admiral
Norris with his cannon been there! Perhaps? And the Pretender is
coming again, they say? And who knows what is coming?--How Gortz,
in about a year hence was laid hold of, and let go, and then
ultimately tried and beheaded (once his lion Master was disposed
of); [19th March, 1719: see Kohler (<italic> Munzbelustiggungen,
<end italic> vi. 233-240, xvii. 297-304) for many curious details
of Gortz and his end.] how, Ambassador Cellamare, and the Spanish
part of the Plot, having been discovered in Paris, Cardinal
Alberoni at Madrid was discovered, and the whole mystery laid
bare; all that mad business, of bringing the Pretender into
England, throwing out George I., throwing out the Regent
d'Orleans, and much more,--is now sunk silent enough, not worthy
of reawakening; but it was then a most loud matter; filling the
European Courts, and especially that of Berlin, with rumors and
apprehensions. No wonder Friedrich Wilhelm was grateful for that
Swedish Peace of his, and named his little daughter "Ulrique" in
honor of it. Tumultuous cloud-world of Lapland Witchcraft had
ceased hereby, and daylight had begun: old women (or old
Cardinals) riding through the sky, on broomsticks, to meet Satan,
where now are they? The fact still dimly perceptible is, Europe,
thanks to that pair of Black-Artists, Gortz and Alberoni, not to
mention Law the Finance-Wizard and his French incantations, had
been kept generally, for these three or four years past, in the
state of a Haunted House; riotous Goblins, of unknown dire intent,
walking now in this apartment of it, now in that; no rest anywhere
for the perturbed inhabitants.

As to Friedrich Wilhelm, his plan in 1717, as all along, in this
bewitched state of matters, was: To fortify his Frontier Towns;
Memel, Wesel, to the right and left, especially to fortify
Stettin, his new acquisition;--and to put his Army, and his
Treasury (or Army-CHEST), more and more in order. In that way we
shall better meet whatever goblins there may be, thinks Friedrich
Wilhelm. Count Lottum, hero of the Prussians at Malplaquet, is
doing his scientific uttermost in Stettin and those Frontier
Towns. For the rest, his Majesty, invited by the Czar and France,
has been found willing to make paction with them, as he is with
all pacific neighbors. In fact, the Czar and he had their private
Conference, at Havelberg, last year,--Havelberg, some sixty miles from Berlin, on the road towards Denmark, as Peter was passing
that way;--ample Conference of. five days; [23d-28th November,
1716: Fassmann, p. 172.]--privately agreeing there, about many
points conducive to tranquillity. And it was on that same errand,
though ostensibly to look after Art and the higher forms of
Civilization so called, that Peter had been to France on this
celebrated occasion of 1717. We know he saw much Art withal;
saw Marly, Trianon and the grandeurs and politenesses;--saw, among
other things, "a Medal of himself fall accidentally at his feet;"
polite Medal "just getting struck in the Mint, with a rising sun
on it; and the motto, VIRES ACQUIRIT EUNDO." [Voltaire, <italic>
OEuvres Completes (Histoire du Czar Pierre), <end italic> xxxi.
336.--Kohler in <italic> Munzbelustigungen, xvii. 386-392 (this
very MEDAL the subject), gives authentic account, day by day, of
the Czar's visit there.] Ostensibly it was to see CETTE BELLE
FRANCE; but privately withal the Czar wished to make his bargain,
with the Regent d'Orleans, as to these goblins walking in the
Northern and Southern parts, and what was to be done with them.
And the result has been, the Czar, Friedrich Wilhelm and the said
Regent have just concluded an Agreement; [4th August, 1717;
Buchholz, i. 43.] undertaking in general, that the goblins shall
be well watched; that they Three will stand by one another in
watching them. And now the Czar will visit Berlin in passing
homewards again. That is the position of affairs, when he pays
this visit. Peter had been in Berlin more than once before;
but almost always in a succinct rapid condition; never with his
"Court" about him till now. This is his last, and by far his
greatest, appearance in Berlin.

Such a transit, of the Barbaric semi-fabulous Sovereignties, could
not but be wonderful to everybody there. It evidently struck
Wilhelmina's fancy, now in her ninth year, very much. What her
little Brother did in it, or thought of it, I nowhere find hinted;
conclude only that it would remain in his head too, visible
occasionally to the end of his life. Wilhelmina's Narrative, very
loose, dateless or misdated, plainly wrong in various particulars,
has still its value for us: human eyes, even a child's, are worth
something, in comparison to human want-of-eyes, which is too
frequent in History-books and elsewhere!--Czar Peter is now
forty-five, his Czarina Catherine about thirty-one. It was in 1698
that he first passed this way, going towards Saardam and practical
Ship-building: within which twenty years what a spell of work
done! Victory of Pultawa is eight years behind him; [27th June,
1709.] victories in many kinds are behind him: by this time he is
to be reckoned a triumphant Czar; and is certainly the strangest
mixture of heroic virtue and brutish Samoeidic savagery the world
at any time had.

It was Sunday, 19th September, 1717, when the Czar arrived in
Berlin. Being already sated with scenic parades, he had begged to
be spared all ceremony; begged to be lodged in Monbijou, the
Queen's little Garden-Palace with river and trees round it, where
he hoped to be quietest. Monbijou has been set apart accordingly;
the Queen, not in the benignest humor, sweeping all her crystals
and brittle things away; knowing the manners of the Muscovites.
Nor in the way of ceremony was there much: King and Queen drove
out to meet him; rampart-guns gave three big salvos, as the
Czarish Majesty stept forth. "I am glad to see you, my Brother
Friedrich," said Peter, in German, his only intelligible language;
shaking hands with the Brother Majesty, in a cordial human manner.
The Queen he, still more cordially, "would have kissed;" but this
she evaded, in some graceful effective way. As to the Czarina,--
who, for OBSTETRIC and other reasons, of no moment to us, had
stayed in Wesel all the time he was in France,--she followed him
now at two days' distance; not along with him, as Wilhelmina has
it. Wilhelmina says, she kissed the Queen's hand, and again and
again kissed it; begged to present her Ladies,--"about four
hundred so-called Ladies, who were of her Suite."--Surely not so
many as four hundred, you too witty Princess? "Mere German
serving-maids for the most part," says the witty Princess; "Ladies
when there is occasion, then acting aa chambermaids, cooks,
washerwomen, when that is over."

Queen Sophie was averse to salute these creatures; but the Czarina
Catherine making reprisals upon our Margravines, and the King
looking painfully earnest in it, she prevailed upon herself.
Was there ever seen such a travelling tagraggery of a Sovereign
Court before? "Several of these creatures [PRESQUE TOUTES, says
the exaggerative Princess] had, in their arms, a baby in rich
dress; and if you asked, 'Is that yours, then?' they answered,
making salaams in Russian style, 'The Czar did me the honor
(<italic> m'a fait l'honneur de me faire cet enfant <end
italic>)!'"--

Which statement, if we deduct the due 25 per cent, is probably not
mythic, after all. A day or two ago, the Czar had been at
Magdeburg, on his way hither, intent upon inspecting matters
there; and the Official Gentlemen,--President Cocceji (afterwards
a very celebrated man) at the head of them,--waited on the Czar,
to do what was needful. On entering, with the proper Address or
complimentary Harangue, they found his Czarish Majesty "standing
between two Russian Ladies," clearly Ladies of the above sort;
for they stood close by him, one of his arms was round the neck of
each, and his hands amused themselves by taking liberties in that
posture, all the time Cocceji spoke. Nay, even this was as nothing
among the Magdeburg phenomena. Next day, for instance, there
appeared in the audience-chamber a certain Serene high-pacing Duke
of Mecklenburg, with his Duchess;--thrice-unfortunate Duke, of
whom we shall too often hear again; who, after some adventures,
under Charles XII. first of all, and then under the enemies of
Charles, had, about a year ago, after divorcing his first Wife,
married a Niece of Peter's:--Duke and Duchess arrive now, by order
or gracious invitation of their Sovereign Uncle, to accompany him
in those parts; and are announced to an eager Czar, giving
audience to his select Magdeburg public. At sight of which most
desirable Duchess and Brother's Daughter, how Peter started up,
satyr-like, clasping her in his arms, and snatching her into an
inner room, with the door left ajar, and there--It is too
Samoeidic for human speech! and would excel belief, were not the
testimony so strong. [Pollnitz (<italic> Memoiren, <end italic>
ii. 95) gives Friedrich Wilhelm as voucher, "who used to relate it
as from eye-and-ear witnesses."] A Duke of Mecklenburg, it would
appear, who may count himself the NON-PLUS-ULTRA of husbands in
that epoch;--as among Sovereign Rulers, too, in a small or great
way, he seeks his fellow for ill-luck!

Duke and Duchess accompanied the Czar to Berlin, where Wilhelmina
mentions them, as presentees; part of those "four hundred"
anomalies. They took the Czar home with them to Mecklenburg: where
indeed some Russian Regiments of his, left here on their return
from Denmark, had been very useful in coercing the rebellious
Ritterschaft (KNIGHTAGE, or Landed-Gentry) of this Duke,--till at
length the general outcry, and voice of the Reich itself, had
ordered the said Regiments to get on march again, and take
themselves away. [The LAST of them, "July, 1717; " two months ago.
(Michaelis, ii. 418.)] For all is rebellion, passive rebellion, in
Mecklenburg; taxes being so indispensable; and the Knights so
disinclined; and this Duke a Sovereign,--such as we may construe
from his quarrelling with almost everybody, and his NOT
quarrelling with an Uncle Peter of that kind. [One poor hint, on
his behalf, let us not omit: "WIFE quitted him in 1719, and lived
at Moscow afterwards!" (General Mannstein, <italic> Memoirs of
Russia, <end italic> London, 1770, p. 27 n.)] His troubles as
Sovereign Duke, his flights to Dantzig, oustings, returns,
law-pleadings and foolish confusions, lasted all his life, thirty
years to come; and were bequeathed as a sorrowful legacy to
Posterity and the neighboring Countries. Voltaire says, the Czar
wished to buy his Duchy from him. [Ubi supra, xxxi. 414.]
And truly, for this wretched Duke, it would have been good to sell
it at any price: but there were other words than his to such a
bargain, had it ever been seriously meditated. By this
extraordinary Duchess he becomes Father (real or putative) of a
certain Princess, whom we may hear of; and through her again is
Grandfather of an unfortunate Russian Prince, much bruited about,
as "the murdered Iwan," in subsequent times. With such a Duke
and Duchess let our acquaintance be the MINIMUM of what
necessity compels.

Wilhelmina goes by hearsay hitherto; and, it is to be hoped,
had heard nothing of these Magdeburg-Mecklenburg phenomena;
but after the Czarina's arrival, the little creature saw with her
own eyes:--

"Next day," that is, Wednesday, 22d "the Czar and his Spouse came
to return the Queen's visit; and I saw the Court myself."
Palace Grand-Apartments; Queen advancing a due length, even to the
outer guard-room; giving the Czarina her right hand, and leading
her into her audience-chamber in that distinguished manner:
King and Czar followed close;--and here it was that Wilhelmina's
personal experiences began. "The Czar at once recognized me,
having seen me before, five years ago [March, 1713]. He caught me
in his arms; fell to kissing me, like to flay the skin off my
face. I boxed his ears, sprawled, and struggled with all my
strength; saying I would not allow such familiarities, and that he
was dishonoring me. He laughed greatly at this idea; made peace,
and talked a long time with me. I had got my lesson: I spoke of
his fleet and his conquests;--which charmed him so much, that he
said more than once to the Czarina, 'If he could have a child like
me, he would willingly give one of his Provinces in exchange.'
The Czarina also caressed me a good deal. The Queen [Mamma] and
she placed themselves under the dais, each in an arm-chair" of
proper dignity; "I was at the Queen's side, and the Princesses of
the Blood," Margravines above spoken of, "were opposite to her,"--
all in a standing posture, as is proper.

"The Czarina was a little stumpy body, very brown, and had neither
air nor grace: you needed only look at her, to guess her low
extraction." It is no secret, she had been a kitchen-wench in her
Lithuanian native country; afterwards a female of the kind called
unfortunate, under several figures: however, she saved the Czar
once, by her ready-wit and courage, from a devouring Turkish
Difficulty, and he made her fortunate and a Czarina, to sit under
the dais as now. "With her huddle of clothes, she looked for all
the world like a German Play-actress; her dress, you would have
said, had been bought at a second-hand shop; all was out of
fashion, all was loaded with silver and greasy dirt. The front of
her bodice she had ornamented with jewels in a very singular
pattern: A double-eagle in embroidery, and the plumes of it set
with poor little diamonds, of the smallest possible carat, and
very ill mounted. All along the facing of her gown were Orders and
little things of metal; a dozen Orders, and as many Portraits of
saints, of relics and the like; so that when she walked, it was
with a jingling, as if you heard a mule with bells to its
harness."--Poor little Czarina; shifty nutbrown fellow-creature,
strangely chased about from the bottom to the top of this
world; it is evident she does not succeed at Queen Sophie
Dorothee's Court!--

"The Czar, on the other hand, was very tall, and might be called
handsome," continues Wilhelmina: "his countenance was beautiful,
but had something of savage in it which put you in fear." Partly a
kind of Milton's-Devil physiognomy? The Portraits give it rather
so. Archangel not quite ruined, yet in sadly ruinous condition;
its heroism so bemired,--with a turn for strong drink, too, at
times! A physiognomy to make one reflect." His dress was of sailor
fashion, coat, altogether plain."

"The Czarina, who spoke German very ill herself, and did not
understand well what the Queen said, beckoned to her Fool to come
near,"--a poor female creature, who had once been a Princess
Galitzin, but having got into mischief, had been excused to the
Czar by her high relations as mad, and saved from death or
Siberia, into her present strange harbor of refuge. With her the
Czarina talked in unknown Russ, evidently "laughing much and
loud," till Supper was announced.

"At table," continues Wilhelmina, "the Czar placed himself beside
the Queen. It is understood this Prince was attempted with poison
in his youth, and that something of it had settled on his nerves
ever after. One thing is certain, there took him very often a sort
of convulsion, like Tic or St.-Vitus, which it was beyond his
power to control. That happened at table now. He got into
contortions, gesticulations; and as the knife was in his hand, and
went dancing about within arm's-length of the Queen, it frightened
her, and she motioned several times to rise. The Czar begged her
not to mind, for he would do her no ill; at the same time he took
her by the hand, which he grasped with such violence that the
Queen was forced to shriek out. This set him heartily laughing;
saying she had not bones of so hard a texture as his Catherine's.
Supper done, a grand Ball had been got ready; but the Czar escaped
at once, and walked home by himself to Monbijou, leaving the
others to dance."

Wilhelmina's story of the Cabinet of Antiques; of the Indecent
little Statue there, and of the orders Catherine got to kiss it,
with a "KOPF AB (Head off, if you won't)!" from the bantering
Czar, whom she had to obey,--is not incredible, after what we have
seen. It seems, he begged this bit of Antique Indecency from
Friedrich Wilhelm; who, we may fancy, would give him such an
article with especial readiness. That same day, fourth of the
Visit, Thursday, 23d of the month, the august Party went its ways
again; Friedrich Wilhelm convoying "as far as Potsdam;" Czar and
Suite taking that route towards Mecklenburg, where he still
intends some little pause before proceeding homeward.
Friedrich Wilhelm took farewell; and never saw the Czar again.

It was on this Journey, best part of which is now done, that the
famous Order bore, "Do it for six thousand thalers; won't allow
you one other penny (<italic> nit einen Pfennig gebe mehr dazu
<end italic>); but give out to the world that it costs me thirty
or forty thousand!" Nay, it is on record that the sum proved
abundant, and even superabundant, near half of it being left as
overplus. [Forster, i. 215.] The hospitalities of Berlin,
Friedrich Wilhelm took upon himself, and he has done them as we
see. You shall defray his Czarish Majesty, to the last Prussian
milestone; punctually, properly, though with thrift!

Peter's, VIATICUM, the Antique Indecency, Friedrich Wilhelm did
not grudge to part with; glad to purchase the Czar's good-will by
coin of that kind. Last year, at Havelberg, he had given the Czar
an entire Cabinet of Amber Articles, belonging to his late Father.
Amber Cabinet, in the lump; and likewise such a Yacht, for shape,
splendor and outfit, as probably Holland never launched before;--
Yacht also belonging to his late Father, and without value to
Friedrich Wilhelm. The old King had got it built in Holland,
regardless of expense,--15,000 pounds, they say, perhaps as good
as 50,000 pounds now; --and it lay at Potsdam: good for what?
Friedrich Wilhelm sent it down the Havel, down the Elbe, silk
sailors and all, towards Hamburg and Petersburg, with a great deal
of pleasure. For the Czar, and peace and good-will with the Czar,
was of essential value to him. Neither, at any rate, is the Czar a
man to take gifts without return. Tall fellows for soldiers:
that is always one prime object with Friedrich Wilhelm;
for already these Potsdam Guards of his are getting ever more
gigantic. Not less an object, though less an ideal or POETIC one
(as we once defined), was this other, to find buyers for the
Manufactures, new and old, which he was so bent on encouraging.
"It is astonishing, what quantities of cloth, of hardware, salt,
and all kinds of manufactured articles the Russians buy from us,"
say the old Books;--"see how our 'Russian Company' flourishes!"
In both these objects, not to speak of peace and good-will in
general, the Czar is our man.

Thus, this very Autumn, there arrive, astonished and astonishing,
no fewer than a hundred and fifty human figures (one half MORE
than were promised), probably from seven to eight feet high;
the tallest the Czar could riddle out from his Dominions: what a
windfall to the Potsdam Guard and its Colonel-King! And all
succeeding Autumns the like, so long as Friedrich Wilhelm lived;
every Autumn, out of Russia a hundred of the tallest mortals
living. Invaluable,--to a "man of genius" mounted on his hobby!
One's "stanza" can be polished at this rate.

In return for these Russian sons of Anak, Friedrich Wilhelm
grudged not to send German smiths, millwrights, drill-sergeants,
cannoneers, engineers; having plenty of them. By whom, as Peter
well calculated, the inert opaque Russian mass might be kindled
into luminosity and vitality; and drilled to know the Art of War,
for one thing. Which followed accordingly. And it is observable,
ever since, that the Russian Art of War has a tincture of GERMAN
in it (solid German, as contradistinguished from unsolid
Revolutionary-French); and hints to us of Friedrich Wilhelm and
the Old Dessauer, to this hour.--EXEANT now the Barbaric
semi-fabulous Sovereignties, till wanted again.



Chapter VIII.

THE CROWN-PRINCE IS PUT TO HIS SCHOOLING.

In his seventh year, young Friedrich was taken out of the hands of
the women; and had Tutors and Sub-Tutors of masculine gender, who
had been nominated for him some time ago, actually set to work
upon their function. These we have already heard of; they came
from Stralsund Siege, all the principal hands.

Duhan de Jandun, the young French gentleman who had escaped from
grammar-lessons to the trenches, he is the practical teacher.
Lieutenant-General Graf Fink von Finkenstein and
Lieutenant-Colonel von Kalkstein, they are Head Tutor
(OBERHOFMEISTER) and Sub-Tutor; military men both, who had been in
many wars besides Stralsund. By these three he was assiduously
educated, subordinate schoolmasters working under them when
needful, in such branches as the paternal judgment would admit;
the paternal object and theirs being to infuse useful knowledge,
reject useless, and wind up the whole into a military finish.
These appointments, made at different precise dates, took effect,
all of them, in the year 1719.

Duhan, independently of his experience in the trenches, appears to
have been an accomplished, ingenious and conscientious man;
who did credit to Friedrich Wilhelm's judgment; and to whom
Friedrich professed himself much indebted in after life.
Their progress in some of the technical branches,
as we shall perceive, was indisputably unsatisfactory. But the
mind of the Boy seems to have been opened by this Duhan,
to a lively, and in some sort genial, perception of things
round him;--of the strange confusedly opulent Universe he
had got into; and of the noble and supreme function which
Intelligence holds there; supreme in Art as in Nature, beyond
all other functions whatsoever. Duhan was now turned of
thirty: a cheerful amiable Frenchman; poor, though of good
birth and acquirements; originally from Champagne. Friedrich loved him very much; always considered him his spiritual
father; and to the end of Duhan's life, twenty years hence,
was eager to do him any good in his power. Anxious always
to repair, for poor Duhan, the great sorrows he came to on his
account, as we shall see.

Of Graf Fink von Finkenstein, who has had military experiences of all kinds and all degrees, from marching as
prisoner into France, "wounded and without his hat," to
fighting at Malplaquet, at Blenheim, even at Steenkirk, as
well as Stralsund; who is now in his sixtieth year, and seems
to have been a gentleman of rather high solemn manners,
and indeed of undeniable perfections,--of this supreme Count
Fink we learn almost nothing farther in the Books, except
that his little Pupil did not dislike him either. The little
Pupil took not unkindly to Fink; welcoming any benignant
human ray, across these lofty gravities of the OBERHOFMEISTER;
went often to his house in Berlin; and made acquaintance with two
young Finks about his own age, whom he found there, and who became
important to him, especially the younger of them, in the course of
the future. [Zedlitz-Neukirch, <italic> Preussisches Adels-Lexikon
<end italic> (Leipzig, l836), ii. 168. <italic> Militair-Lexicon,
<end italic> i. 420.] This Pupil, it may be said, is creditably
known for his attachment to his Teachers and others; an attached
and attaching little Boy. Of Kalkstein, a rational, experienced
and earnest kind of man, though as yet but young, it is certain
also that the little Fritz loved him; and furthermore that the
Great Friedrich was grateful to him, and had a high esteem of his
integrity and sense. "My master, Kalkstein," used to be his
designation of him, when the name chanced to be mentioned in after
times. They continued together, with various passages of mutual
history, for forty years afterwards, till Kalkstein's death.
Kalkstein is at present twenty-eight, the youngest of the three
Tutors; then, and ever after, an altogether downright correct
soldier and man. He is of Preussen, or Prussia Proper, this
Kalkstein;--of the same kindred as that mutinous Kalkstein, whom
we once heard of, who was "rolled in a carpet," and kidnapped out
of Warsaw, in the Great Elector's time. Not a direct descendant of
that beheaded Kalkstein's but, as it were, his NEPHEW so many
times removed. Preussen is now far enough from mutiny; subdued,
with all its Kalksteins, into a respectful silence, not lightly
using the right even of petition, or submissive remonstrance,
which it may still have. Nor, except on the score of parliamentary
eloquence and newspaper copyright, does it appear that Preussen
has suffered by the change.

How these Fink-Kalkstein functionaries proceeded in the great task
they had got,--very great task, had they known what Pupil had
fallen to them,--is not directly recorded for us, with any
sequence or distinctness. We infer only that everything went by
inflexible routiue; not asking at all, WHAT pupil?--nor much,
Whether it would suit any pupil? Duhan, with the tendencies we
have seen in him, who is willing to soften the inflexible when
possible, and to "guide Nature" by a rather loose rein, was
probably a genial element in the otherwise strict affair.
Fritz had one unspeakable advantage, rare among princes and even
among peasants in these ruined ages: that of NOT being taught, or
in general not, by the kind called "Hypocrites, and even
Sincere-Hypocrites,"--fatalest species of the class HYPOCRITE.
We perceive he was lessoned, all along, not by enchanted Phantasms
of that dangerous sort, breathing mendacity of mind,
unconsciously, out of every look; but by real Men, who believed
from the heart outwards, and were daily doing what they taught.
To which unspeakable advantage we add a second, likewise
considerable; That his masters, though rigorous, were not
unlovable to him;--that his affections, at least, were kept alive;
that whatever of seed (or of chaff and hail, as was likelier) fell
on his mind, had SUNSHINE to help in dealing with it. These are
two advantages still achievable, though with difficulty, in our
epoch, by an earnest father in behalf of his poor little son.
And these are, at present, nearly all; with these well achieved,
the earnest father and his son ought to be thankful. Alas, in
matter of education, there are no high-roads at present; or there
are such only as do NOT lead to the goal. Fritz, like the rest of
us, had to struggle his way, Nature and Didactic Art differing
very much from one another; and to do battle, incessant partial
battle, with his schoolmasters for any education he had.

A very rough Document, giving Friedrich Wilhelm's regulations on
this subject, from his own hand, has come down to us. Most dull,
embroiled, heavy Document; intricate, gnarled, and, in fine, rough
and stiff as natural bull-headedness helped by Prussian pipe-clay
can make it;--contains some excellent hints, too; and will show us
something of Fritzchen and of Friedrich Wilhelm both at once.
That is to say, always, if it can be read! If by aid of abridging,
elucidating and arranging, we can get the reader engaged to peruse
it patiently;--which seems doubtful. The points insisted on, in a
ponderous but straggling confused manner, by his didactic Majesty,
are chiefly these:-- 
  1. Must impress my Son with a proper love and fear of God, as
the foundation and sole pillar of our temporal and eternal
welfare. No false religions, or sects of Atheist, Arian (ArRian),
Socinian, or whatever name the poisonous things have, which can so
easily corrupt a young mind, are to be even named in his hearing:
on the other hand, a proper abhorrence (ABSCHEU) of Papistry, and
insight into its baselessness and nonsensicality (UNGRUND UND
ABSURDITAT), is to be communicated to him:"--Papistry, which is
false enough, like the others, but impossible to be ignored like
them; mention that, and give him due abhorrence for it. For we are
Protestant to the bone in this country; and cannot stand
ABSURDITAT, least of all hypocritically religious ditto! But the
grand thing will be, "To impress on him the true religion, which
consists essentially in this, That Christ died for all men," and
generally that the Almighty's justice is eternal and omnipresent,
--"which consideration is the only means of keeping a sovereign
person (SOUVERAINE MACHT), or one freed from human penalties, in
the right way."
  2. "He is to learn no Latin;" observe that, however it may
surprise you. What has a living German man and King, of the
eighteenth Christian SOECULUM, to do with dead old Heathen Latins,
Romans, and the lingo THEY spoke their fraction of sense and
nonsense in? Frightful, how the young years of the European
Generations have been wasted, for ten centuries back; and the
Thinkers of the world have become mere walking Sacks of
Marine-stores, "GELEHRTEN, Learned," as they call themselves;
and gone LOST to the world, in that manner, as a set of
confiscated Pedants;--babbling about said Heathens, and THEIR
extinct lingo and fraction of sense and nonsense, for the thousand
years last past! Heathen Latins, Romans;--who perhaps were no
great things of Heathen, after all, if well seen into? I have
heard judges say, they were INferior, in real worth and grist, to
German home-growths we have had, if the confiscated Pedants could
have discerned it! At any rate, they are dead, buried deep, these
two thousand years; well out of our way;--and nonsense enough of
our own left, to keep sweeping into corners. Silence about their
lingo and them, to this new Crown-Prince! "Let the Prince learn
French and German," so as to write and speak, "with brevity and
propriety," in these two languages, which may be useful to him in
life. That will suffice for languages,--provided he have anything
effectually rational to say in them. For the rest,
  3. "Let him learn Arithmetic, Mathematics, Artillery,--
Economy to the very bottom." And, in short, useful knowledge
generally; useless ditto not at all. "History in particular;--
Ancient History only slightly (NUR UBERHIN);--but the History of
the last hundred and fifty Years to the exactest pitch. The JUS
NATURALE and JUS GENTIUM," by way of hand-lamp to History,
"he must be completely master of; as also of Geography, whatever
is remarkable in each Country. And in Histories, most especially
the History of the house of Brandenburg; where he will find
domestic examples, which are always of more force than foreign.
And along with Prussian History, chiefly that of the Countries
which have been connected with it, as England, Brunswick, Hessen
and the others. And in reading of wise History-books there must
be considerations made (<italic> sollen beym Lesen kluger
Historiarum Betrachtungen gemacht werden <end italic>) upon the
causes of the events."--Surely, O King!
  4. "With increasing years, you will more and more, to a most
especial degree, go upon Fortification,"--mark you!--"the
Formation of a Camp, and the other War-Sciences; that the Prince
may, from youth upwards, be trained to act as Officer and General,
and to seek all his glory in the soldier profession." This is
whither it must all tend. You, Finkenstein and Kalkstein, "have
both of you, in the highest measure, to make it your care to
infuse into my Son [EINZUPRAGEN, stamp into him] a true love for
the Soldier business, and to impress on him that, as there is
nothing in the world which can bring a Prince renown and honor
like the sword, so he would be a despised creature before all men,
if he did not love it, and seek his sole glory (DIE EINZIGE
GLORIA) therein." [Preuss, i. 11-14 (of date 13th August, 1718).]
Which is an extreme statement of the case; showing how much we
have it at heart.

These are the chief Friedrich-Wilhelm traits; the rest of the
document corresponds in general to what the late Majesty had
written for Friedrich Wilhelm himself on the like occasion.
[Stenzel, iii. 572.] Ruthless contempt of Useless Knowledge;
and passionate insight into the distinction between Useful and
Useless, especially into the worth of Soldiering as a royal
accomplishment, are the chief peculiarities here. In which latter
point too Friedrich Wilhelm, himself the most pacific of men,
unless you pulled the whiskers of him, or broke into his goods
and chattels, knew very well what he was meaning,--much better
than we of the "Peace Society" and "Philanthropic Movement" could
imagine at first sight! It is a thing he, for his part, is very
decided upon.

Already, a year before this time, [1st September, 1717: Preuss,
i. 13.] there had been instituted, for express behoof of little
Fritz, a miniature Soldier Company, above a hundred strong;
which grew afterwards to be near three hundred, and indeed rose to
be a permanent Institution by degrees; called <italic> Kompagnie
der Kronprinzlichen Kadetten <end italic> (Company of Crown-Prince
Cadets). A hundred and ten boys about his own age, sons of noble
families, had been selected from the three Military Schools then
extant, as a kind of tiny regiment for him; where, if he was by no
means commander all at once, he might learn his exercise in
fellowship with others. Czar Peter, it is likely, took a glance of
this tiny regiment just getting into rank and file there;
which would remind the Czar of his own young days. An experienced
Lieutenant-Colonel was appointed to command in chief. A certain
handy and correct young fellow, Rentsel by name, about seventeen,
who already knew his fugling to a hair's-breadth, was
Drill-master; and exencised them all, Fritz especially, with due
strictness; till, in the course of time and of attainments, Fritz
could himself take the head charge. Which he did duly, in a year
or two: a little soldier thenceforth; properly strict, though of
small dimensions; in tight blue bit of coat and cocked-hat:--
miniature image of Papa (it is fondly hoped and expected),
resembling him as a sixpence does a half-crown. In 1721 the
assiduous Papa set up a "little arsenal" for him, "in the Orange
Hall of the Palace:" there let him, with perhaps a chosen comrade
or two, mount batteries, fire exceedingly small brass ordnance,--
his Engineer-Teacher, one Major von Senning, limping about (on
cork leg), and superintending if needful.

Rentzel, it is known, proved an excellent Drill-sergeant;--had
good talents every way, and was a man of probity and sense.
He played beautifully on the flute too, and had a cheerful
conversible turn; which naturally recommended him still farther to
Fritz; and awoke or encouraged, among other faculties, the musical
faculty in the little Boy. Rentzel continued about him, or in
sight of him, through life; advancing gradually, not too fast,
according to real merit and service (Colonel in 1759); and never
did discredit to the choice Friedrich Wilhelm had made of him.
Of Senning, too, Engineer-Major von Senning, who gave Fritz his
lessons in Mathematics, Fortification and the kindred branches,
the like, or better, can be said. He was of graver years; had lost
a leg in the Marlborough Campaigns, poor gentleman; but had
abundant sense, native worth and cheery rational talk, in him:
so that he too could never be parted with by Friedrich, but
was kept on hand to the last, a permanent and variously
serviceable acquisition.

Thus, at least, is the military education of our Crown-Prince
cared for. And we are to fancy the little fellow, from his tenth
year or earlier, going about in miniature soldier figure, for most
part; in strict Spartan-Brandenburg costume, of body as of mind.
Costume little flattering to his own private taste for finery;
yet by no means unwholesome to him, as he came afterwards to know,
In October, 1723, it is on record, when George I. came to visit
his Son-in-law and Daughter at Berlin, his Britannic Majesty,
looking out from his new quarters on the morrow, saw Fritzchen
"drilling his Cadet Company;" a very pretty little phenomenon.
Drilling with clear voice, military sharpness, and the precision
of clock-work on the Esplanade (LUSTGARTEN) there;--and doubtless
the Britannic Majesty gave some grunt of acquiescence, perhaps
even a smile, rare on that square heavy-laden countenance of his.
That is the record: [Forster, i. 215.] and truly it forms for us
by far the liveliest little picture we have got, from those dull
old years of European History. Years already sunk, or sinking,
into lonesome unpeopled Dusk for all men; and fast verging towards
vacant Oblivion and eternal Night;--which (if some few articles
were once saved out of them) is their just and inevitable portion
from afflicted human nature.

Of riding-masters, fencing-masters, swimming-masters; much less of
dancing-masters, music-masters (celebrated Graun, "on the organ,"
with Psalm-tunes), we cannot speak; but the reader may be
satisfied they were all there, good of their kind, and pushing on
at a fair rate. Nor is there lack anywhere of paternal supervision
to our young Apprentice, From an early age, Papa took the
Crown-Prince with him on his annual Reviews. From utmost Memel on
the Russian border, down to Wesel on the French, all Prussia, in
every nook of it, garrison, marching-regiment, board of
management, is rigorously reviewed by Majesty once a year.
There travels little military Fritz, beside the military Majesty,
amid the generals and official persons, in their hardy Spartan
manner; and learns to look into everything like a Rhadamanthine
Argus, and how the eye of the master, more than all other
appliances, fattens the cattle.

On his hunts, too, Papa took him. For Papa was a famous hunter,
when at Wusterhausen in the season:--hot Beagle-chase, hot
Stag-hunt, your chief game deer; huge "Force-Hunt" (PARFORCE-JAGD,
the woods all beaten, and your wild beasts driven into straits and
caudine-forks for you); Boar-hunting (SAUHETZE, "sow-baiting," as
the Germans call it), Partridge-shooting, Fox- and Wolf-hunting;--
on all grand expeditions of such sort, little Fritz shall ride
with Papa and party. Rough furious riding; now on swift steed, now
at places on WURSTWAGEN,--WURSTWAGEN, "Sausage-Car" so called,
most Spartan of vehicles, a mere STUFFED POLE or "sausage" with
wheels to it, on which you sit astride, a dozen or so of you, and
career;--regardless of the summer heat and sandy dust, of the
winter's frost-storms and muddy rain. All this the little
Crown-Prince is bound to do;--but likes it less and less, some of
us are sorry to observe! In fact he could not take to hunting at
all, or find the least of permanent satisfaction in shooting
partridges and baiting sows,--"with such an expenditure of
industry and such damage to the seedfields," he would sometimes
allege in extenuation. In later years he has been known to retire
into some glade of the thickets, and hold a little Flute-Hautbois
Concert with his musical comrades, while the sows were getting
baited. Or he would converse with Mamma and her Ladies, if her
Majesty chanced to be there, in a day for open driving.
Which things by no means increased his favor with Papa, a sworn
hater of "effeminate practices."

He was "nourished on beer-soup," as we said before. Frugality,
activity, exactitude were lessons daily and hourly brought home to
him, in everything he did and saw. His very sleep was stingily
meted out to him: "Too much sleep stupefies a fellow!" Friedrich
Wilhelm was wont to say;--so that the very doctors had to
interfere, in this matter, for little Fritz. Frugal enough, hardy
enough; urged in every way to look with indifference on hardship,
and take a Spartan view of life.

Money-allowance completely his own, he does not seem to have had
till he was seventeen. Exiguous pocket-money, counted in GROSCHEN
(English PENCE, or hardly more), only his Kalkstein and
Finkenstein could grant as they saw good;--about eighteenpence in
the month, to start with, as would appear. The other small
incidental moneys, necessary for his use, were likewise all laid
out under sanction of his Tutors, and accurately entered in
Day-books by them, audited by Friedrich Wilhelm; of which some
specimens remain, and one whole month, September, 1719 (the Boy's
eighth year), has been published. Very singular to contemplate, in
these days of gold-nuggets and irrational man-mountains fattened
by mankind at such a price! The monthly amount appears to have
been some 3 pounds 10 shillings:--and has gone, all but the
eighteenpence of sovereign pocket-money, for small furnishings and
very minute necessary luxuries;--as thus:--
  "To putting his Highness's shoes on the last;" for stretching
them to the little feet,--and only one "last," as we perceive.
"To twelve yards of Hairtape,"--HAARBAND, for our little queue,
which becomes visible here. "For drink-money to the Postilions."
"For the Housemaids at Wusterhausen," Don't I pay them myself?
objects the auditing Papa, at that latter kind of items: No more
of that. "For mending the flute, four GROSCHEN [or pence];"
"Two Boxes of Colors, sixteen ditto;" "For a live snipe,
twopence;" "For grinding the hanger [little swordkin];" "To a Boy
whom the dog bit;" and chiefly of all, "To the KLINGBEUTEL,"--
Collection-plate, or bag, at Church,--which comes upon us once,
nay twice, and even thrice a week, eighteenpence each time, and
eats deep into our straitened means. [Preuss, i. 17.]

On such terms can a little Fritz be nourished into a Friedrich the
Great; while irrational man-mountains, of the beaverish or
beaverish-vulpine sort, take such a price to fatten them into
monstrosity! The Art-manufacture of your Friedrich can come very
cheap, it would appear, if once Nature have done her part in
regard to him, and there be mere honest will on the part of the
by-standers. Thus Samuel Johnson, too, cost next to nothing in the
way of board and entertainment in this world. And a Robert Burns,
remarkable modern Thor, a Peasant-god of these sunk ages, with a
touch of melodious RUNES in him (since all else lay under ban for
the poor fellow), was raised on frugal oatmeal, at an expense of
perhaps half a crown a week. Nuggets and ducats are divine;
but they are not the most divine. I often wish the Devil had the
lion's share of them,--at once, and not circuitously as now.
It would be an unspeakable advantage to the bewildered sons of
Adam, in this epoch!

But with regard to our little Crown-Prince's intellectual culture,
there is another Document, specially from Papa's hand, which, if
we can redact, adjust and abridge it, as in the former case, may
be worth the reader's notice, and elucidate some things for him.
It is of date, Wusterhausen, 3d September, 1721; little Fritz now
in his tenth year, and out there, with his Duhans and
Finkensteins, while Papa is rusticating for a few weeks.
The essential title is, or might be:--


<italic> To Head-Governor van Finkenstein, Sub-Governor von
Kalkstein, Preceptor Jacques Egide Duhan de Jandun, and others
whom it may concern: Regulations for schooling, at Wusterhausen,
3d September, 1721; <end italic> [Preuss, i. 19.]--in greatly
abridged form.

SUNDAY. "On Sunday he is to rise at 7; and as soon as he has got
his slippers on, shall kneel down at his bedside, and pray to God,
so as all in the room may hear it [that there be no deception or
short measure palmed upon us], in these words: 'Lord God, blessed
Father, I thank thee from my heart that thou hast so graciously
preserved me through this night. Fit me for what thy holy will is;
and grant that I do nothing this day, nor all the days of my life,
which can divide me from thee. For the Lord Jesus my Redeemer's
sake. Amen.' After which the Lord's Prayer. Then rapidly and
vigorously (GESCHWINDE UND HURTIG) wash himself clean, dress and
powder and comb himself [we forget to say, that while they are
combing and queuing him, he breakfasts, with brevity, on tea]:
Prayer, with washing, breakfast and the rest, to be done pointedly
within fifteen minutes [that is, at a quarter past 7].

"This finished, all his Domestics and Duhan shall come in, and do
family worship (<italic> das grosse Gebet zu halten <end italic>):
Prayer on their knees, Duhan withal to read a Chapter of the
Bible, and sing some proper Psalm or Hymn [as practised in
well-regulated families]:--It will then be a quarter to 8.
All the Domestics then withdraw again; and Duhan now reads with my
Son the Gospel of the Sunday; expounds it a little, adducing the
main points of Christianity;--questioning from Noltenius's
Catechism [which Fritz knows by heart]:--it will then
be 9 o'clock.

"At 9 he brings my Son down to me; who goes to Church, and dines,
along with me [dinner at the stroke of Noon]: the rest of the day
is then his own [Fritz's and Duhan's]. At half-past 9 in the
evening, he shall come and bid me goodnight. Shall then directly
go to his room; very rapidly (SEHR GESCHWIND) get off his clothes,
wash his hands [get into some tiny dressing-gown or CASSAQUIN, no
doubt]; and so soon as that is done, Duhan makes a prayer on his
knees, and sings a hymn; all the Servants being again there.
Instantly after which, my Son shall get into bed; shall be in bed
at half-past 10;"--and fall asleep how soon, your Majesty? This is
very strict work.

MONDAY. "On Monday, as on all weekdays, he is to be called at 6;
and so soon as called he is to rise; you are to stand to him
(ANHALTEN) that he do not loiter or turn in bed, but briskly and
at once get up; and say his prayers, the same as on Sunday
morning. This done, he shall as rapidly as possible get on his
shoes and spatterdashes; also wash his face and hands, but not
with soap. Farther shall put on his CASSAQUIN [short
dressing-gown], have his hair combed out and queued, but not
powdered. While getting combed and queued, he shall at the same
time take breakfast of tea, so that both jobs go on at once;
and all this shall be ended before half-past 6." Then enter Duhan
and the Domestics, with worship, Bible, Hymn, all as on Sunday;
this is done by 7, and the Servants go again.

"From 7 till 9 Duhan takes him on History; at 9 comes Noltenius
[a sublime Clerical Gentleman from Berlin] with the Christian
Religion, till a quarter to 11. Then Fritz rapidly (GESCHWIND)
washes his face with water, hands with soap-and-water;
clean shirt; powders, and puts on his coat;--about 11 comes to the
King. Stays with the King till 2,"--perhaps promenading a little;
dining always at Noon; after which Majesty is apt to be
slumberous, and light amusements are over.

"Directly at 2, he goes back to his room. Duhan is there, ready;
takes him upon the Maps and Geography, from 2 to 3,--giving
account [gradually!] of all the European Kingdoms; their strength
and weakness; size, riches and poverty of their towns. From 3 to
4, Duhan treats of Morality (<italic> soll die Moral tractiren
<end italic>). From 4 to 5, Duhan shall write German Letters with
him, and see that he gets a good STYLUM [which he never in the
least did]. About 5, Fritz shall wash his hands, and go to the
King;--ride out; divert himself, in the air and not in his room;
and do what he likes, if it is not against God."

There, then, is a Sunday, and there is one Weekday; which latter
may serve for all the other five:--though they are strictly
specified in the royal monograph, and every hour of them marked
out: How, and at what points of time, besides this of HISTORY, of
MORALITY, and WRITING IN GERMAN, of Maps and GEOGRAPHY with the
strength and weakness of Kingdoms, you are to take up ARITHMETIC
more than once; WRITING OF FRENCH LETTERS, so as to acquire a good
STYLUM: in what nook you may intercalate "a little getting by
heart of something, in order to strengthen the memory;" how
instead of Noltenius, Panzendorf (another sublime Reverend
Gentleman from Berlin, who comes out express) gives the clerical
drill on Tuesday morning;--with which two onslaughts, of an
hour-and-half each, the Clerical Gentlemen seem to withdraw for
the week, and we hear no more of them till Monday and Tuesday come
round again.

On Wednesday we are happy to observe a liberal slice of holiday
come in. At half-past 9, having done his HISTORY, and "got
something by heart to strengthen the memory [very little, it is to
be feared], Fritz shall rapidly dress himself, and come to the
King. And the rest of the day belongs to little Fritz
(<italic> gehort vor Fritzchen <end italic>)." On Saturday, too,
there is some fair chance of half-holiday:--

"SATURDAY, forenoon till half-past 10, come History, Writing and
Ciphering; especially repetition of what was done through the
week, and in MORALITY as well [adds the rapid Majesty], to see
whether he has profited. And General Graf von Finkenstein, with
Colonel von Kalkstein, shall be present during this. If Fritz has
profited, the afternoon shall be his own. If he has not profited,
he shall, from 2 to 6, repeat and learn rightly what he has
forgotten on the past days." And so the laboring week winds itself
up. Here, however, is one general rule which cannot be too much
impressed upon YOU, with which we conclude:--

"In undressing and dressing, you must accustom him to get out of,
and into, his clothes as fast as is humanly possible (<italic>
hurtig so viel als menschenmoglich ist <end italic>). You will
also look that he learn to put on aud put off his clothes himself,
without help from others; and that he be clean and neat, and not
so dirty (<italic> nicht so schmutzig end italic>)." "Not so
dirty," that is my last word; and here is my sign-manual,

"FRIEDRICH WILHELM." [Preuss, i. 21.]



Chapter IX.

WUSTERHAUSEN.

Wusterhausen, where for the present these operations go on, lies
about twenty English miles southeast of Berlin, as you go towards
Schlesien (Silesia);--on the old Silesian road, in a flat moory
country made of peat and sand;--and is not distinguished for its
beauty at all among royal Hunting-lodges. The Gohrde at Hanover,
for example, what a splendor there in comparison! But it serves
Friedrich Wilhelm's simple purposes: there is game abundant in the
scraggy woodlands, otter-pools, fish-pools, and miry thickets, of
that old "Schenkenland" (belonged all once to the "SCHENKEN
Family," till old King Friedrich bought it for his Prince);
retinue sufficient find nooks for lodgment in the poor old
Schloss so called; and Noltenius and Panzendorf drive out each
once a week, in some light vehicle, to drill Fritz in his
religious exercises.

One Zollner, a Tourist to Silesia, confesses himself rather
pleased to find even Wusterhausen in such a country of sandy
bent-grass, lean cattle, and flat desolate languor.

"Getting to the top of the ridge" (most insignificant "ridge,"
made by hand; Wilhelmina satirically says), Tourist Zollner can
discern with pleasure "a considerable Brook,"--visible, not
audible, smooth Stream, or chain of meres and lakelets, flowing
languidly northward towards Kopenik. Inaudible big Brook or
Stream; which, we perceive, drains a slightly hollowed Tract;
too shallow to be called valley,--of several miles in width, of
several yards in depth;--Tract with wood here and there on it, and
signs of grass and culture, welcome after what you have passed.
On the foreground close to you is the Hamlet of
Konigs-Wusterhausen, with tolerable Lime-tree Avenue leading to
it, and the air of something sylvan from your Hill-top.
Konigs-Wusterhausen was once WENDISH-Westerhausen, and not far off
is DEUTSCH-Wusterhausen, famed, I suppose, by faction-fights in
the Vandalic times: both of them are now KING'S-Wusterhausen
(since the King came thither), to distinguish them from other
Wusterhausens that there are.

Descending, advancing through your Lime-tree Avenue, you come upon
the backs of office-houses, out-houses, stables or the like,--on
your left hand I have guessed,--extending along the Highway.
And in the middle of these you come at last to a kind of Gate or
vaulted passage (ART VON THOR, says Zollner), where, if you have
liberty, you face to the left, and enter. Here, once through into
the free light again, you are in a Court: four-square space, not
without prospect; right side and left side are lodgings for his
Majesty's gentlemen; behind you, well in their view, are stables
and kitchens: in the centre of the place is a Fountain "with hewn
steps and iron railings;" where his simple Majesty has been known
to sit and smoke, on summer evenings. The fourth side of your
square, again, is a palisade; beyond which, over bridge and moat
and intervening apparatus, you perceive, on its trim terraces, the
respectable old Schloss itself. A rectangular mass, not of vast
proportions, with tower in the centre of it (tower for
screw-stair, the general roadway of the House); and looking though
weather-beaten yet weather-tight, and as dignified as it can.
This is Wusterhausen; Friedrich Wilhelm's Hunting-seat from
of old.

A dreadfully crowded place, says Wilhelmina, where you are stuffed
into garrets, and have not room to turn. The terraces are of some
magnitude, trimmed all round with a row of little clipped trees,
one big lime-tree at each corner;--under one of these big
lime-trees, aided by an awning: it is his Majesty's delight to
spread his frugal but substantial dinner, four-and-twenty covers,
at the stroke of 12, and so dine SUB DIO. If rain come on, says
Wilhelmina, you are wet to mid-leg, the ground being hollow in
that place,--and indeed in all weathers your situation every way,
to a vehement young Princess's idea, is rather of the horrible
sort. After dinner, his Majesty sleeps, stretched perhaps on some
wooden settle or garden-chair, for about an hour; regardless of
the flaming heat, under his awning or not; and we poor Princesses
have to wait, praying all the Saints that they would resuscitate
him soon. This is about 2 p.m.; happier Fritz is gone to his
lessons, in the interim.

These four Terraces, this rectangular Schloss with the four big
lindens at the corners, are surrounded by a Moat; black abominable
ditch, Wilhelmina calls it; of the hue of Tartarean Styx, and of a
far worse smell, in fact enough to choke one, in hot days after
dinner, thinks the vehement Princess. Three Bridges cross this
Moat or ditch, from the middle of three several Terraces or sides
of the Schloss; and on the fourth it is impassable. Bridge first,
coming from the palisade and Office-house Court, has not only
human sentries walking at it; but two white Eagles perch near it,
and two black ditto, symbols of the heraldic Prussian Eagle,
screeching about in their littery way; item two black Bears, ugly
as Sin, which are vicious wretches withal, and many times do
passengers a mischief. As perhaps we shall see, on some occasion.
This is Bridge first, leading to the Court and to the outer
Highway; a King's gentleman, going to bed at night, has always to
pass these Bears. Bridge second leads us southward to a common
Mill which is near by; its clacking audible upon the common Stream
of the region, and not unpleasant to his Majesty, among its
meadows fringed with alders, in a country of mere and moor.
Bridge third, directly opposite to Bridge first and its Bears,
leads you to the Garden; whither Mamma, playing tocadille all day
with her women, will not, or will not often enough, let us poor
girls go. [Zollner, <italic> Briefe uber Schlesien <end italic>
(Berlin, 1792), i. 2, 3; Wilhelmina, i. 364, 365.]

Such is Wusterhausen, as delineated by a vehement Princess, some
years hence,--who becomes at last intelligible, by study and the
aid of our Silesian Tourist. It is not distinguished among Country
Palaces: but the figure of Friedrich Wilhelm asleep there after
dinner, regardless of the flaming sun (should he sleep too long
and the shadow of his Linden quit him),--this is a sight which no
other Palace in the world can match; this will long render
Wusterhausen memorable to me. His Majesty, early always as the
swallows, hunts, I should suppose, in the morning; dines and
sleeps, we may perceive, till towards three, or later.
His Official business he will not neglect, nor shirk the hours due
to it; towards sunset there may be a walk or ride with Fritz, or
Feekin and the womankind: and always, in the evening, his Majesty
holds TABAGIE, TABAKS-COLLEGIUM (Smoking College, kind of
Tobacco-Parliament, as we might name it), an Institution
punctually attended to by his Majesty, of which we shall by and by
speak more. At Wusterhausen his Majesty holds his Smoking Session
mostly in the open air, oftenest "on the steps of the Great
Fountain" (how arranged, as to seating and canvas-screening,
I cannot say);--smokes there, with his Grumkows, Derschaus,
Anhalt-Dessaus, and select Friends, in various slow talk;
till Night kindle her mild starlights, shake down her dark
curtains over all Countries, and admonish weary mortals that it
is now bedtime.

Not much of the Picturesque in this autumnal life of our little
Boy. But he has employments in abundance; and these make the
permitted open air, under any terms, a delight. He can rove about
with Duhan among the gorse and heath, and their wild summer
tenantry winged and wingless. In the woodlands are wild swine, in
the meres are fishes, otters; the drowsy Hamlets, scattered round,
awaken in an interested manner at the sound of our pony-hoofs and
dogs. Mittenwalde, where are shops, is within riding distance;
we could even stretch to Kopenik, and visit in the big Schloss
there, if Duhan were willing, and the cattle fresh. From some
church-steeple or sand-knoll, it is to be hoped, some blue streak
of the Lausitz Hills may be visible: the Sun and the Moon and the
Heavenly Hosts, these full certainly are visible; and on an Earth
which everywhere produces miracles of all kinds, from the daisy or
heather-bell up to the man, one place is nearly equal to another
for a brisk little Boy.

Fine Palaces, if Wusterhausen be a sorry one, are not wanting to
our young Friend: whatsoever it is in the power of architecture
and upholstery to do for him, may be considered withal as done.
Wusterhausen is but a Hunting-lodge for some few Autumn weeks:
the Berlin Palace and the Potsdam, grand buildings both, few
Palaces in the world surpass them; and there, in one or the other
of these, is our usual residence.--Little Fritz, besides his young
Finkensteins and others of the like, has Cousins, children of his
Grandfather's Half-brothers, who are comrades of his. For the
Great Elector, as we saw, was twice wedded, and had a second set
of sons and daughters: two of the sons had children; certain of
these are about the Crown-Prince's own age, "Cousins" of his
(strictly speaking, Half-cousins of HIS FATHER'S), who are much
about him in his young days,--and more or less afterwards,
according to the worth they proved to have. Margraves and
Margravines of Schwedt,--there are five or six of such young
Cousins. Not to mention the eldest, Friedrich Wilhelm by name, who
is now come to manhood (born 1700);--who wished much in after
years to have had Wilhelmina to wife; but had to put up with a
younger Princess of the House, and ought to have been thankful.
This one has a younger Brother, Heinrich, slightly Fritz's senior,
and much his comrade at one time; of whom we shall transiently
hear again. Of these two the Old Dessauer is Uncle: if both his
Majesty and the Crown-Prince should die, one of these would be
king. A circumstance which Wilhelmina and the Queen have laid well
to heart, and build many wild suspicions upon, in these years!
As that the Old Dessauer, with his gunpowder face, has a plot one
day to assassinate his Majesty,--plot evident as sunlight to
Wilhelmina and Mamma, which providentially came to nothing;--and
other spectral notions of theirs. [Wilhelmina, i. 35, 41.]
The Father of these two Margraves (elder of the two Half-brothers
that have children) died in the time of Old King Friedrich, eight
or nine years ago. Their Mother, the scheming old Margravine,
whom I always fancy to dress in high colors, is still living,--
as Wilhelmina well knows!

Then, by another, the younger of those old Half-brothers, there is
a Karl, a second Friedrich Wilhelm, Cousin Margraves: plenty of
Cousins;--and two young Margravines among them, [Michaelis,
i. 425.] the youngest about Fritz's own age. [NOTE OF THE COUSIN
MARGRAVES.--Great Elector, by his Second Wife, had five Sons, two
of whom left Children;--as follows (so far as they concern us,--
he others omitted):--
  1. Son PHILIP'S Children (Mother the Old Dessauer's Sister) are:
Friedrich Wilhelm (1700), who wished much, but in vain, to marry
Wilhelmina. Heinrich Friedrich (1709), a comrade of Fritz's in
youth; sometimes getting into scrapes;--misbehaved, some way, at
the Battle of Molwits (first of Friedrich's Battles), 1741, and
was inexorably CUT by the new King, and continued under a cloud
thenceforth .--This PHILIP ("Philip Wilhelm") died 1711, his
forty-third year; Widow long survived him.
  2. Son ALBERT'S Children (Mother a Courland Princess) are:
Karl (1705); lived near Custrin; became a famed captain, in the
Silesian Wars, under his Cousin. Friedrich (1701); fell at
Molwitz, 1741. Friedrich Wilhelm (a Margraf Friedrich Wilhelm
"No. 2,"--NAMESAKE of his now Majesty, it is like); born 1714;
killed at Prag, by a cannon-shot (at King Friedrich's hand,
reconnoitring the place), 1744.--This ALBERT ("Albert Friedrich" )
died suddenly 1731, age fifty-nine.]
No want of Cousins; the Crown-Prince seeing much of them all;
and learning pleasantly their various qualities, which were good
in most, in some not so good, and did not turn out supreme in any
case. But, for the rest, Sister Wilhelmina is his grand
confederate and companion; true in sport and in earnest, in joy
and in sorrow. Their truthful love to one another, now and till
death, is probably the brightest element their life yielded to
either of them.

What might be the date of Fritz's first appearance in the
Roucoulles "Soiree held on Wednesdays," in the Finkenstein or any
other Soiree, as an independent figure, I do not know. But at the
proper time, he does appear there, and with distinction not
extrinsic alone;--talks delightfully in such places; can discuss,
even with French Divines, in a charmingly ingenious manner.
Another of his elderly consorts I must mention: Colonel Camas,
a highly cultivated Frenchman (French altogether by parentage and
breeding, though born on Prussian land), who was Tutor, at one
time, to some of those young Margraves. He has lost an arm,--left
it in those Italian Campaigns, under Anhalt-Dessau and Eugene;--
but by the aid of a cork substitute, dexterously managed, almost
hides the want. A gallant soldier, fit for the diplomacies too;
a man of fine high ways. [<italic> Militair-Lexicon, <end italic>
i. 308.] And then his Wife--In fact, the Camas House, we perceive,
had from an early time been one of the Crown-Prince's haunts.
Madam Camas is a German Lady; but for genial elegance, for wit and
wisdom and goodness, could not readily be paralleled in France or
elsewhere. Of both these Camases there will be honorable and
important mention by and by; especially of the Lady, whom he
continues to call "Mamma" for fifty years to come, and corresponds
with in a very beautiful and human fashion.

Under these auspices, in such environment, dimly visible to us, at
Wusterhausen and elsewhere, is the remarkable little Crown-Prince
of his century growing up,--prosperously as yet.



Chapter X.

THE HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS.

Friedrich Wilhelm holds Tabagie nightly; but at Wusterhausen or
wherever he may be, there is no lack of intricate Official Labor,
which, even in the Tabagie, Friedrich Wilhelm does not forget.
At the time he was concocting those Instructions for his little
Prince's Schoolmasters, and smoking meditative under the stars,
with Magdeburg "RITTER-DIENST" and much else of his own to think
of,--there is an extraneous Political Intricacy, making noise
enough in the world, much in his thoughts withal, and no doubt
occasionally murmured of amid the tobacco-clouds. The Business of
the Heidelberg Protestants; which is just coming to a height in
those Autumn months of 1719.

Indeed this Year 1719 was a particularly noisy one for him.
This is the year of the "nephritic colic," which befell at
Brandenburg on some journey of his Majesty's; with alarm of
immediate death; Queen Sophie sent for by express; testament made
in her favor; and intrigues, very black ones, Wilhelmina thinks,
following thereupon. [<italic> Memoires de Bareith, <end italic>
i. 26-29.] And the "Affair of Clement," on which the old Books are
so profuse, falls likewise, the crisis of it falls, in 1719.
Of Clement the "Hungarian Nobleman," who was a mere Hungarian
Swindler, and Forger of Royal Letters; sowing mere discords, black
suspicions, between Friedrich Wilhelm and the neighboring Courts,
Imperial and Saxon: "Your Majesty to be snapt up, some day, by
hired ruffians, and spirited away, for behoof of those treacherous
Courts:" so that Friedrich Wilhelm fell into a gloom of
melancholy, and for long weeks "never slept but with a pair of
loaded pistols under his pillow:"--of this Clement, an adroit
Phenomenon of the kind, and intensely agitating to Friedrich
Wilhelm;--whom Friedrich Wilhelm had at last to lay hold of, try,
this very year, and ultimately hang, [Had arrived in Berlin, "end
of 1717;" stayed about a year, often privately in the King's
company, poisoning the royal mind; withdrew to the Hague,
suspecting Berlin might soon grow dangerous;--is wiled out of that
Territory into the Prussian, and arrested, by one of Friedrich
Wilhelm's Colonels, "end of 1718;" lies in Spandau, getting tried,
for seventeen months; hanged, with two Accomplices, 18th April,
1720. (See, in succession, Stenzel, iii. 298, 302; Fassmann,
p. 321; Forster, ii. 272, and iii. 320-324.)] amid the rumor and
wonder of mankind:--of him, noisy as he was, and still filling
many pages of the old Books, a hint shall suffice, and we will say
nothing farther. But this of the Heidelberg Protestants, though
also rather an extinct business, has still some claims on us.
This, in justice to the "inarticulate man of genius," and for
other reasons, we must endeavor to resuscitate a little.


OF KUR-PFALZ KARL PHILIP: HOW HE GOT A WIFE LONG SINCE,
AND DID FEATS IN THE WORLD.

There reigns, in these years, at Heidelberg, as Elector Palatine,
a kind-tempered but abrupt and somewhat unreasonable old
gentleman, now verging towards sixty, Karl Philip by name; who has
come athwart the Berlin Court and its affairs more than once;
and will again do so, in a singularly disturbing way. From before
Friedrich Wilhelm's birth, all through Friedrich Wilhelm's life
and farther, this Karl Philip is a stone-of-stumbling there.
His first feat in life was that of running off with a Prussian
Princess from Berlin; the rumor of which was still at its height
when Friedrich Wilhelm, a fortnight after, came into the world,--
the gossips still talking of it, we may fancy, when Friedrich
Wilhelm was first swaddled. An unheard-of thing; the manner of
which was this.

Readers have perhaps forgotten, that old King Friedrich I. once
had a Brother; elder Brother, who died, to the Father's great
sorrow, and made way for Friedrich as Crown-Prince. This Brother
had been married a short time; he left a Widow without children;
a beautiful Lithuanian Princess, born Radzivil, and of great
possessions in her own country: she, in her crapes and close-cap,
remained an ornament to the new Berlin Court for some time;--not
too long. The mourning-year once out, a new marriage came on foot
for the brilliant widow; the Bridegroom, a James Sobieski, eldest
Prince of the famous John, King Sobieski; Prince with fair
outlooks towards Polish Sovereignty, and handy for those
Lithuanian Possessions of hers: altogether an eligible match.

This marriage was on foot, not quite completed; when Karl Philip,
Cadet of the Pfalz, came to Berlin;--a rather idle young man, once
in the clerical way; now gone into the military, with secular
outlooks, his elder Brother, Heir-Apparent of the Pfalz, "having
no children:"--came to Berlin, in the course of visiting, and
roving about. The beautiful Widow-Princess seemed very charming to
Karl Philip; he wooed hard; threw the Princess into great
perplexity. She had given her Yes to James Sobieski; inevitable
wedding-day was coming on with James; and here was Karl Philip
wooing so:--in brief, the result was, she galloped off with Karl
Philip, on the eve of said wedding-day; married Karl Philip (24th
July, 1688); and left Prince James standing there, too much like
Lot's Wife, in the astonished Court of Berlin. [Michaelis,
ii. 93.] Judge if the Berlin. public talked,--unintelligible to
Friedrioh Wilhelm, then safe in swaddling-clothes.

King Sobieski, the Father, famed Deliverer of Vienna, was in high
dudgeon. But Karl Philip apologized, to all lengths; made his
peace at last, giving a Sister of his own to be Wife to the
injured James. This was Karl Philip's first outbreak in life;
and it was not his only one. A man not ill-disposed, all grant;
but evidently of headlong turn, with a tendency to leap fences in
this world. He has since been soldiering about, in a loose way,
governing Innspruck, fighting the Turks. But, lately, his elder
Brother died childless (year 1716); and left him Kurfurst of the
Pfalz. His fair Radzivil is dead long ago; she, and a successor,
or it may be two. Except one Daughter, whom the fair Radzivil left
him, he has no children; and in these times, I think, lives with a
third Wife, of the LEFT-HAND kind.

His scarcity of progeny is not so indifferent to my readers as
they might suppose. This new KUR-PFALZ (Elector-Palatine) Karl
Philip is by genealogy--who, thinks the reader? Pfalz-NEUBURG by
line; own Grandson of that Wolfgang Wilhelm, who got the slap on
the face long since, on account of the Cleve-Julich matter! So it
has come round. The Line of Simmern died out, Winter-King's
Grandson the last of that; and then, as right was, the Line of
Neuburg took the top place, and became Kur-Pfalz. The first of
these was this Karl Philip's Father, son of the Beslapped; an old
man when he succeeded. Karl Philip is the third Kur-Pfalz of the
Neuburg Line; his childless elder Brother (he who collected the
Pictures at Dusseldorf, once notable there) was second of the
Neuburgs. They now, we say, are Electors-Palatine, Head of the
House;--and, we need not add, along with their Electorate and
Neuburg Country, possess the Cleve-Julioh Moiety of Heritage,
about which there was such worrying in time past. Nay the
last Kur-Pfalz resided there, and collected the "Dusseldorf
Gallery," as we have just said; though Karl Philip prefers
Heidelberg hitherto.

To Friedrich Wilhelm the scarcity of progeny is a
thrice-interesting fact. For if this actual Neuburg should leave
no male heir, as is now humanly probable,--the Line of Neuburg too
is out; and then great things ought to follow for our Prussian
House. Then, by the last Bargain, made in 1666, with all
solemnity, between the Great Elector, our Grandfather of famous
memory, and your serene Father the then Pfalz-Neuburg,
subsequently Kur-Pfalz, likewise of famous memory, son of the
Beslapped,--the whole Heritage falls to Prussia, no other Pfalz
Branch having thenceforth the least claim to it. Bargain was
express; signed, sealed, sanctioned, drawn out on the due extent
of sheepskin, which can still be read. Bargain clear enough:
but will this Karl Philip incline to keep it?

That may one day be the interesting question. But that is not the
question of controversy at present: not that, but another;
for Karl Philip, it would seem, is to be a frequent
stone-of-stumbling to the Prussian House. The present question is
of a Protestant-Papist matter; into which Friedrich Wilhelm has
been drawn by his public spirit alone.


KARL PHILIP AND HIS HEIDELBERG PROTESTANTS.

The Pfalz population was, from of old, Protestant-Calvinist;
the Electors-Palatine used to be distinguished for their
forwardness in that matter. So it still is with the Pfalz
population; but with the Electors, now that the House of Simmern
is out, and that of Neuburg in, it is not so. The Neuburgs, ever
since that slap, on the face, have continued Popish; a sore fact
for this Protestant population, when it got them for Sovereigns.
Karl Philip's Father, an old soldier at Vienna, and the elder
Brother, a collector of Pictures at Dusseldorf, did not outwardly
much molest the creed of their subjects. Protestants, and the
remnant of Catholics (remnant naturally rather expanding now that
the Court shone on it), were allowed to live in peace, according
to the Treaty of Westphalia, or nearly so; dividing the churches
and church-revenues equitably between them, as directed there.
But now that Karl Philip is come in, there is no mistaking his
procedures. He has come home to Heidelberg with a retinue of
Jesuits about him; to whom the poor old gentleman, looking before
and after on this troublous world, finds it salutary to give ear.

His nibblings at Protestant rights, his contrivances to slide
Catholics into churches which were not theirs, and the like
foul-play in that matter, had been sorrowful to see, for some time
past. The Elector of Mainz, Chief-Priest of Germany, is busy in
the same bad direction; he and others. Indeed, ever since the
Peace of Ryswick, where Louis XIV. surreptitiously introduced a
certain "Clause," which could never be got rid of again, ["CLAUSE
OF THE FOURTH ARTICLE" is the technical name of it. FOURTH ARTICLE
stipulates that King Louis XIV. shall punctually restore all
manner of towns and places, in the Palatinate &c. (much BURNT,
somewhat BE-JESUITED too, in late Wars, by the said Kihg, during
his occupancy): CLAUSE OF FOURTH ARTICLE (added to it, by a quirk,
"at midnight," say the Books) contains merely these words,
<italic> "Religione tamen Catholica Romana, in locis sic
restitutis, in statu quo nunc est remanente: <end italic>
Roman-Catholic religion to continue as it now is [as WE have made
it to be] in such towns and places."--Which CLAUSE gave rise to
very great but ineffectual lamenting and debating. (Scholl,
<italic> Traites de Paix <end italic> (Par. 1817), i. 433-438;
Buchholz; Spittler, <italic> Geschichte Wurtembergs; &c).]
nibbling aggressions of this kind have gone on more and more.
Always too sluggishly resisted by the CORPUS EVANGELICORUM, in the
Diets or otherwise, the "United Protestant Sovereigns" not being
an active "Body" there. And now more sluggishly than ever;--said
CORPUS having August Elector of Saxony, Catholic (Sham-Catholic)
King of Poland, for its Official Head; "August the Physically
Strong," a man highly unconcerned for matters Evangelical! So that
the nibblings go on worse and worse. An offence to all Protestant
Rulers who had any conscience; at length an unbearable on to
Friedrich Wilhelm, who, alone of them all, decided to intervene
effectually, and say, at whatever risk there might be, We will not
stand it!

Karl Philip, after some nibblings, took up the Heidelberg
Catechism (which candidly calls the Mass "idolatrous"), and
ordered said Catechism, an Authorized Book, to cease in his
dominions. Hessen-Cassel, a Protestant neighbor, pleaded,
remonstrated, Friedrich Wilhelm glooming in the rear; but to no
purpose. Our old gentleman, his Priests being very diligent upon
him, decided next to get possession of the HEILIGE-GEIST KIRCHE
(Church of the Holy Ghost, principal Place of Worship at
Heidelberg), and make it his principal Cathedral Church there.
By Treaty of Westphalia, or peaceably otherwise, the Catholics are
already in possession of the Choir: but the whole Church would be
so much better. "Was it not Catholic once?" thought Karl Philip to
himself: "built by our noble Ancestor Kaiser Rupert of the Pfalz,
Rupert KLEMM ["Pincers," so named for his firmness of mind]:--
why should these Heretics have it? I will build them another!"
These thoughts, in 1719, the third year of Karl Philip's rule, had
broken out into open action (29th August, 4th September the
consummation of it) [Mauvillon, i. 340-345.] and precisely in the
ime when Friedrich Wilhelm was penning that first Didactic Morsel
which we read, grave clouds from the Palatinate were beginning to
overshadow the royal mind more or less.

For the poor Heidelberg Consistorium, as they could not undertake
to give up their Church on request of his Serenity,--"How dare we,
or can we?" answered they,--had been driven out by compulsion and
stratagem. Partly strategic was the plan adopted, to avoid
violence; smith's picklocks being employed, and also mason's
crowbars: but the end was, On the 31st of August, 1719,
Consistorium and Congregation found themselves fairly in the
street, and the HEILIGE-GEIST KIRCHE clean gone from them.
Screen of the Choir is torn down; one big Catholic edifice now;
getting decorated into a Court Church, where Serene Highness may
feel his mind comfortable.

The poor Heidelbergers, thus thrown into the street, made
applications, lamentations; but with small prospect of help:
to whom apply with any sure prospect? Remonstrances from
Hessen-Cassel have proved unavailing with his bigoted Serene
Highness. CORPS EVANGELICORUM, so presided over as at present,
what can be had of such a Corpus? Long-winded lucubrations at the
utmost; real action, in such a matter; none. Or will the Kaiser,
his Jesuits advising him, interfere to do us justice? Kur-Mainz
and the rest;--it is everywhere one story. Everywhere unhappy
Protestantism getting bad usage, and ever worse; and no Corpus
Evangelicorum, or appointed Watchdog, doing other than hang its
ears, and look sorry for itself and us!--

The Heidelbergers, however, had applied to Friedrich Wilhelm among
others. Friedrich Wilhelm, who had long looked on these
Anti-Protestant phenomena with increasing anger, found now that
this of the Heidelberg Catechism and HEILIGE-GEIST KIRCHE was
enough to make one's patience run over. Your unruly Catholic bull,
plunging about, and goring men in that mad absurd manner, it will
behoove that somebody take him by the horns, or by the tail, and
teach him manners. Teach him, not by vocal precepts, it is likely,
which would avail nothing on such a brute, but by practical
cudgelling and scourging to the due pitch. Pacific Friedrich
Wilhelm perceived that he himself would have to do that
disagreeable feat:--the growl of him, on coming to such
resolution, must have been consolatory to these poor
Heidelbergers, when they applied!--His plan is very simple, as the
plans of genius are; but a plan leading direct to the end desired,
and probably the only one that would have done so, in the
circumstances. Cudgel in hand, he takes the Catholic bull,--shall
we say, by the horns?--more properly perhaps by the tail;
and teaches him manners.


FRIEDRICH WILHELM'S METHOD;--PROVES REMEDIAL IN HEIDELBERG.

Friedrich Wilhelm's first step, of course, was to remonstrate
pacifically with his Serene Highness on the Heidelberg-Church
affair: from this he probably expected nothing; nor did he get
anything. Getting nothing from this, and the countenance of
external Protestant Powers, especially of George I. and the
Dutch, being promised him in ulterior measures, he directed his
Administrative Officials in Magdeburg, in Minden, in Hamersleben,
where are Catholic Foundations of importance, to assemble the
Catholic Canons, Abbots, chief Priests and all whom it might
concern in these three Places, and to signify to them
as follows:--

"From us, your Protestant Sovereign, you yourselves and all men
will witness, you have hitherto had the best of usage, fair-play,
according to the Laws of the REICH, and even-more. With the
Protestants at Heidelberg, on the part of the Catholic Powers, it
is different. It must cease to be different; it must become the
same. And to make it do so, you are the implement I have.
Sorry for it, but there is no other handy. From this day your
Churches also are closed, your Public Worship ceases, and
furthermore your Revenues cease; and all makes dead halt, and
falls torpid in respect of you. From this day; and so continues,
till the day (may it be soon!) when the Heidelberg Church of the
Holy Ghost is opened again, and right done in that question.
Be it yours to speed such day: it is you that can and will, you
who know those high Catholic regions, inaccessible to your
Protestant Sovereign. Till then you are as dead men; temporarily
fallen dead for a purpose. And herewith God have you in his
keeping!"  [Mauvillon, i. 347, 349.]

That was Friedrich Wilhelm's plan; the simplest, but probably the
one effectual plan. Infallible this plan, if you dare stand upon
it; which Friedrich Wilhelm does. He has a formidable Army, ready
for fight; a Treasury or Army-chest in good order. George I.
seconds, according to bargain; shuts the Catholic Church at Zelle
in his Luneburg Country, in like fashion; Dutch, too, and Swiss
will endorse the matter, should it grow too serious. All which,
involving some diplomacy and correspondence, is managed with the
due promptitude, moreover. [Church of Zelle shut up, 4th November;
Minden, 28th November; Monastery of Hamersleben, 3d December, &c.
(Putter, <italic> Historische Entwickelung der hautigen
Staatsverfassung des Teutschen Reichs, <end italic> Gottingen,
1788, ii. 384, 390).] And so certain doors are locked;
and Friedrich Wilhelm's word, unalterable as gravitation, has gone
forth. In this manner is the mad Catholic bull taken by the TAIL:
keep fast hold, and apply your cudgel duly in that attitude, he
will not gore you any more!

The Magdeburg-Hamersleben people shrieked piteously; not to
Friedrich Wilhelm, whom they knew to be deaf on that side of his
head, but to the Kaiser, to the Pope, to the Serenity of
Heidelberg. Serene Highness of Heidelberg was much huffed;
Kaiser dreadfully so, and wrote heavy menacing rebukes. To which
Friedrich Wilhelm listened with a minimum of reply; keeping firm
hold of the tail, in such bellowing of the animal. The end was,
Serene Highness had to comply; within three months, Kaiser, Serene
Highness and the other parties interested, found that there would
be nothing for it but to compose themselves, and do what was just.
April 16th, 1720, the Protestants are reinstated in their
HEILIGE-GEIST KIRCHE; Heidelberg Catechism goes its free course
again, May 16th; and one Baron Reck [Michaelis, ii. 95; Putter,
ii. 384, 390; Buchholz, pp. 61-63.] is appointed Commissioner,
from the CORPUS EVANGELICORUM, to Heidelberg; who continues
rigorously inspecting Church matters there for a considerable
time, much to the grief of Highness and Jesuits, till he can
report that all is as it should be on that head. Karl Philip felt
so disgusted with these results, he removed his Court, that same
year, to Mannheim; quitted Heidelberg; to the discouragement and
visible decay of the place; and, in spite of humble petitions and
remonstrances, never would return; neither he nor those that
followed him would shift from Mannheim again, to this day.


PRUSSIAN MAJESTY HAS DISPLEASED THE KAISER AND THE KING OF POLAND.

Friedrich Wilhelm's praises from the Protestant public were great,
on this occasion. Nor can we, who lie much farther from it in
every sense, refuse him some grin of approval. Act, and manner of
doing the act, are creditably of a piece with Friedrich Wilhelm;
physiognomic of the rugged veracious man. It is one of several
such acts done by him: for it was a duty apt to recur in Germany,
in his day. This duty Friedrich Wilhelm, a solid Protestant after
his sort, and convinced of the "nothingness and nonsensicality
(UNGRUND UND ABSURDITAT) of Papistry," was always honorably prompt
to do. There is an honest bacon-and-greens conscience in the man;
almost the one conscience you can find in any royal man of that
day. Promptly, without tremulous counting of costs, he always
starts up, solid as oak, on the occurrence of such a thing, and
says, "That is unjust; contrary to the Treaty of Westphalia;
you will have to put down that!"--And if words avail not, his plan
is always the same: Clap a similar thumbscrew, pressure equitably
calculated, on the Catholics of Prussia; these can complain to
their Popes and Jesuit Dignitaries: these are under thumbscrew
till the Protestant pressure be removed. Which always did rectify
the matter in a little time. One other of these instances, that of
the Salzburg Protestants, the last such instance, as this of
Heidelberg was the first, will by and by claim notice from us.

It is very observable, how Friedrich Wilhelm, hating quarrels, was
ever ready to turn out for quarrel on such an occasion;
though otherwise conspicuously a King who stayed well at home,
looking after his own affairs; meddling with no neighbor that
would be at peace with him. This properly is Friedrich Wilhelm's
"sphere of political activity" among his contemporaries;
this small quasi-domestic sphere, of forbidding injury to
Protestants. A most small sphere, but then a genuine one: nor did
he seek even this, had it not forced itself upon him. And truly we
might ask, What has become of the other more considerable
"spheres" in that epoch? The supremest loud-trumpeting "political
activities" which then filled the world and its newspapers, what
has the upshot of them universally been? Zero, and oblivion;
no other. While this poor Friedrich-Wilhelm sphere is perhaps
still a countable quantity. Wise is he who stays well at home, and
does the duty he finds lying there!--

Great favor from the Protestant public: but, on the other hand,
his Majesty had given offence in high places. What help for it?
The thing was a point of conscience with him; natural to the surly
Royal Overseer, going his rounds in the world, stick in hand!
However, the Kaiser was altogether gloomy of brow at such
disobedience. A Kaiser unfriendly to Friedrich Wilhelm: witness
that of the RITTER-DIENST (our unreasonable Magdeburg Ritters,
countenanced by him, on such terms, in such style too), and other
offensive instances that could be given. Perhaps the Kaiser will
not always continue gloomy of brow; perhaps the thoughts of the
Imperial breast may alter, on our behalf or his own, one day?--

Nor could King August the Physically Strong be glad to see his
"Director" function virtually superseded, in this triumphant way.
A year or two ago, Friedrich Wilhelm had, with the due cautions
and politic reserves, inquired of the CORPUS EVANGELICORUM,
"If they thought the present Directorship (that of August the
Physically Strong) a good one?" and "Whether he, Friedrich
Wilhelm, ought not perhaps himself to be Director?"--To which,
though the answer was clear as noonday, this poor Corpus had only
mumbled some "QUIETA NON MOVERE," or other wise-foolish saw;
and helplessly shrugged its shoulders. [1717-1719, when August's
KURPRINZ, Heir-Apparent, likewise declared himself Papist, to the
horror and astonishment of poor Saxony, and wedded the late Kaiser
Joseph's Daughter:--not to Father August's horror; who was
steering towards "popularity in Poland," "hereditary Polish
Crown," &c. with the young man. (Buchholz, i. 53-56.)] But King
August himself,--though a jovial social kind of animal, quite
otherwise occupied in the world; busy producing his three hundred
and fifty-four Bastards there, and not careful of Church matters
at all,--had expressed his indignant surprise. And now, it would
seem nevertheless, though the title remains where it was, the
function has fallen to another, who actually does it: a thing to
provoke comparisons in the public.

Clement, the Hungarian forger, vender of false state-secrets, is
well hanged; went to the gallows (18th April, 1720) with much
circumstance, just two days before that Heidelberg Church was got
reopened. But the suspicions sown by Clement cannot quite be
abolished by the hanging of him: Forger indisputably; but who
knows whether he had not something of fact for his? What with
Clement, what with this Heidelberg business, the Court of Berlin
has fallen wrong with Dresden, with Vienna itself, and important
clouds have risen.

<italic>There is an absurd Flame of War, blown out by Admiral
Byng; and a new Man of Genius announces himself to the dim
Populations. <end italic>

The poor Kaiser himself is otherwise in trouble of his own, at
this time. The Spaniards and he have fallen out, in spite of
Utrecht Treaty and Rastadt ditto; the Spaniards have taken Sicily
from him; and precisely in those days while Karl Philip took to
shutting up the HEILIGE-GEIST Church at Heidelberg, there was,
loud enough in all the Newspapers, silent as it now is, a "Siege
of Messina" going on; Imperial and Piedmontese troops doing duty
by land, Admiral Byng still more effectively by sea, for the
purpose of getting Sicily back. Which was achieved by and by,
though at an extremely languid pace. [Byng's Sea-fight, 10th
August, 1718 (Campbell's <italic> Lives of the Admirals, <end
italic> iii. 468); whereupon the Spaniards, who had hardly yet
completed their capture of Messina, are besieged in it;--
29th October, 1719, Messina retaken (this is the "Siege of
Messina"): February, 1720, Peace is clapt up (the chief article,
that Alberoni shall be packed away), and a "Congress of Cambrai"
is to meet, and settle everything.] One of the most tedious
Sieges; one of the paltriest languid Wars (of extreme virulence
and extreme feebleness, neither party having any cash left), and
for an object which could not be excelled in insignificance.
Object highly interesting to Kaiser Karl VI. and Elizabeth Farnese
Termagant Queen of Spain. These two were red, or even were pale,
with interest in it; and to the rest of Adam's Posterity it was
not intrinsically worth an ounce of gunpowder, many tons of that
and of better commodities as they had to spend upon it. True, the
Spanish Navy got well lamed in the business; Spanish Fleet blown
mostly to destruction,--"Roads of Messina, 10th August, 1718," by
the dexterous Byng (a creditable handy figure both in Peace and
War) and his considerable Sea-fight there:--if that was an object
to Spain or mankind, that was accomplished. But the "War," except
that many men were killed in it, and much vain babble was uttered
upon it, ranks otherwise with that of Don Quixote, for conquest of
the enchanted Helmet of Mambrino, which when looked into proved to
be a Barber's Basin.

Congress of Cambrai, and other high Gatherings and convulsive
Doings, which all proved futile, and look almost like Lapland
witchcraft now to us, will have to follow this futility of a War.
It is the first of a long series of enchanted adventures, on which
Kaiser Karl,--duelling with that Spanish Virago, Satan's Invisible
World in the rear of her,--has now embarked, to the woe of
mankind, for the rest of his life. The first of those
terrifico-ludicrous paroxysms of crisis into which he throws the
European Universe; he with his Enchanted Barber's-Basin
enterprises;--as perhaps was fit enough, in an epoch presided over
by the Nightmares. Congress of Cambrai is to follow; and much else
equally spectral. About all which there will be enough to say
anon! For it was a fearful operation, though a ludicrous one, this
of the poor Kaiser; and it tormented not the big Nations only, and
threw an absurd Europe into paroxysm after paroxysm; but it
whirled up, in its wide-weeping skirts, our little Fritz and his
Sister, and almost dashed the lives out of them, as we shall see!
Which last is perhaps the one claim it now has to a cursory
mention from mankind.

Byng's Sea-fight, done with due dexterity of manoeuvring, and then
with due emphasis of broadsiding, decisive of that absurd War, and
almost the one creditable action in it, dates itself 10th August,
1718. And about three months later, on the mimic stage at Paris
there came out a piece, OEDIPE the title of it, [18th November,
1718.] by one Francois Arouet, a young gentleman about twenty-two;
and had such a run as seldom was;--apprising the French
Populations that, to all appearance, a new man of genius had
appeared among them (not intimating what work he would do);
and greatly angering old M. Arouet of the Chamber of Accouuts;
who thereby found his Son as good as cast into the whirlpools, and
a solid Law-career thenceforth impossible for the young fool.--
The name of that "M. Arouet junior" changes itself, some years
hence, into M. DE VOLTAIRE; under which latter designation he will
conspicuously reappear in this Narrative.

And now we will go to our little Crown-Prince again;--ignorant,
he, of all this that is mounting up in the distance, and that it
will envelop him one day.



Chapter XI.

ON THE CROWN-PRINCE'S PROGRESS IN HIS SCHOOLING.

Wilhelmina says, [<italic> Memoires, <end italic> i. 22.] her
Brother was "slow" in learning: we may presume, she means idle,
volatile, not always prompt in fixing his attention to what did
not interest him. Moreover, he was often weakly in health, as she
herself adds; so that exertion was not recommendable for him.
Herr von Loen (a witty Prussian Official, and famed man-of-letters
once, though forgotten now) testifies expressly that the Boy was
of bright parts, and that he made rapid progress. "The
Crown-Prince manifests in this tender age [his seventh year] an
uncommon capacity; nay we may say, something quite extraordinary
(<italic> etwas ganz Ausserordentliches <end italic>). He is a
most alert and vivacious Prince; he has fine and sprightly
manners; and shows a certain kindly sociality, and so affectionate
a disposition that all things may be hoped of him. The French Lady
who [under Roucoulles] has had charge of his learning hitherto,
cannot speak of him without enthusiasm. <italic> 'C'est un esprit
ange'lique <end italic> (a little angel),' she is wont to say.
He takes up, and learns, whatever is put before him, with the
greatest facility." [Van Loen, <italic> Kleine Schriften, <end
italic> ii. 27 (as cited in Rodenbeck, No. iv. 479).]

For the rest, that Friedrich Wilhelm's intentions and
Rhadamanthine regulations, in regard to him, were fulfilled in
every point, we will by no means affirm. Rules of such exceeding
preciseness, if grounded here and there only on the SIC-VOLO,
how could they be always kept, except on the surface and to the
eye merely? The good Duhan, diligent to open his pupil's mind, and
give Nature fair-play, had practically found it inexpedient to tie
him too rigorously to the arbitrary formal departments where no
natural curiosity, but only order from without, urges the
ingenious pupil. What maximum strictness in school-drill there can
have been, we may infer from one thing, were there no other:
the ingenious Pupil's mode of SPELLING. Fritz learned to write a
fine, free-flowing, rapid and legible business-hand; "Arithmetic"
too, "Geography," and many other Useful Knowledges that had some
geniality of character, or attractiveness in practice, were among
his acquisitions; much, very much he learned in the course of his
life; but to SPELL, much more to punctuate, and subdue the higher
mysteries of Grammar to himself, was always an unachievable
perfection. He did improve somewhat in after life; but here is the
length to which he had carried that necessary art in the course of
nine years' exertion, under Duhan and the subsidiary preceptors;
it is in the following words and alphabetic letters that he
gratefully bids Duhan farewell,--who surely cannot have been a
very strict drill-sergeant in the arbitrary branches of schooling!

"Mon cher Duhan Je Vous promais (PROMETS) que quand j'aurez
(J'AURAI) mon propre argent en main, je Vous donnerez (DONNERAI)
enuelement (ANNUELLEMENT) 2400 ecu (ECUS) par an, et je vous
aimerais (AIMERAI) toujour encor (TOUJORS ENCORE) un peu plus
q'asteure (QU'A CETTE HEURE) s'il me l'est (M'EST) posible
(POSSIBLE)."

"MY DEAR DUHAN,--I promise to you, that when I shall have my money
in my own hands, I will give you annually 2400 crowns [say 350
pounds] EVERY YEAR; and that I will love you always even a little
more than at present, if that be possible.

"FRIDERIC P.R. [Prince-Royal]."

"POTSDAM, le 20 de juin, 1727." [Preuss, i. 22.]


The Document has otherwise its beauty; but such is the spelling of
it. In fact his Grammar, as he would himself now and then
regretfully discern, in riper years, with some transient attempt
or resolution to remedy or help it, seems to have come mainly by
nature; so likewise his "STYLUS" both in French and German,--
a very fair style, too, in the former dialect:--but as to his
spelling, let him try as he liked, he never came within sight
of perfection.

The things ordered with such rigorous minuteness, if but arbitrary
things, were apt to be neglected; the things forbidden, especially
in the like case, were apt to become doubly tempting. It appears,
the prohibition of Latin gave rise to various attempts, on the
part of Friedrich, to attain that desirable Language.
Secret lessons, not from Duhan, but no doubt with Duhan's
connivance, were from time to time undertaken with this view:
once, it is recorded, the vigilant Friedrich Wilhelm, going his
rounds, came upon Fritz and one of his Preceptors (not Duhan but a
subaltern) actually engaged in this illicit employment.
Friedrich himself was wont to relate this anecdote in after 1ife.
[Busching, <italic> Beitrage zu der Lebensgeschichte denkwurdiger
Personen, <end italic> v. 33. Preuss, i. 24.] They had Latin
books, dictionaries, grammars on the table, all the contraband
apparatus; busy with it there, like a pair of coiners taken in the
fact. Among other Books was a copy of the Golden Bull of Kaiser
Karl IV.,--<italic> Aurea Bulla, <end italic> from the little
golden BULLETS or pellets hung to it,--by which sublime Document,
as perhaps we hinted long ago, certain so-called Fundamental
Constitutions, or at least formalities and solemn practices,
method of election, rule of precedence, and the like, of the Holy
Roman Empire, had at last been settled on a sure footing, by that
busy little Kaiser, some three hundred and fifty years before;
a Document venerable almost next to the Bible in Friedrich
Wilhelm's loyal eyes, "What is this; what are you venturing upon
here?" exclaims Paternal Vigilance, in an astonished dangerous
tone. <italic> "Ihro Majestat, ich explicire dem Prinzen Auream
Bullam," <end italic> exclaimed the trembling pedagogue: "Your
Majesty, I am explaining AUREA BULLA [Golden Bull] to the
Prince!"--"Dog, I will Golden-Bull you!" said his Majesty,
flourishing his rattan, <italic> "Ich will dich, Schurke,
be-auream-bullam!" <end italic> which sent the terrified wretch
off at the top of his speed, and ended the Latin for that time.
[Forster, i. 356.]

Friedrich's Latin could never come to much, under these
impediments. But he retained some smatterings of it in mature
life; and was rather fond of producing his classical scraps,--
often in an altogether mouldy, and indeed hitherto inexplicable
condition. <italic> "De gustibus non est disputandus," "Beati
possEdentes," "CompIlle intrare," "BeatUS pauperes spiritus;" <end
italic> the meaning of these can be guessed: but <italic> "Tot
verbas tot spondera," <end italic> for example,--what can any
commentator make of that? <italic> "Festina lente," "Dominus
vobiscum," "Flectamus genua," "Quod bene notandum;" <end italic>
these phrases too, and some three or four others of the like, have
been riddled from his Writings by diligent men: [Preuss (i. 24)
furnishes the whole stock of them.] <italic> "O tempora, O mores!
<end italic> You see, I don't forget my Latin," writes he once.

The worst fruit of these contraband operations was, that they
involved the Boy in clandestine practices, secret disobediences,
apt to be found out from time to time, and tended to alienate his
Father from him. Of which sad mutual humor we already find traces
in that early Wusterhausen Document: "Not to be so dirty," says
the reproving Father. And the Boy does not take to hunting at all,
likes verses, story-books, flute-playing better; seems to be of
effeminate tendencies, an EFFEMINIRTER KERL; affects French modes,
combs out his hair like a cockatoo, the foolish French fop,
instead of conforming to the Army-regulation, which prescribes
close-cropping and a club!

This latter grievance Friedrich Wilhelm decided, at last, to
abate, and have done with; this, for one. It is an authentic fact,
though not dated,--dating perhaps from about Fritz's fifteenth
year. "Fritz is a QUERPFEIFER UND POET," not a Soldier! would his
indignant Father growl; looking at those foreign effeminate ways
of his. QUERPFEIFE, that is simply "German-flute," "CROSS-PIPE"
(or FIFE of any kind, for we English have thriftily made two
useful words out of the Deutsch root); "Cross-pipe," being held
across the mouth horizontally. Worthless employment, if you are
not born to be of the regimental band! thinks Friedrich Wilhelm.
Fritz is celebrated, too, for his fine foot; a dapper little
fellow, altogether pretty in the eyes of simple female courtiers,
with his blond locks combed out at the temples, with his bright
eyes, sharp wit, and sparkling capricious ways. The cockatoo
locks, these at least we will abate! decides the Paternal mind.

And so, unexpectedly, Friedrich Wilhelm has commanded these bright
locks, as contrary to military fashion, of which Fritz has now
unworthily the honor of being a specimen, to be ruthlessly shorn
away. Inexorable: the HOF-CHIRURGUS (Court-Surgeon, of the nature
of Barber-Surgeon), with scissors and comb, is here; ruthless
Father standing by. Crop him, my jolly Barber; close down to the
accurate standard; soaped club, instead of flowing locks;
we suffer no exceptions in this military department: I stand here
till it is done. Poor Fritz, they say, had tears in his eyes;
but what help in tears? The judicious Chirurgus, however, proved
merciful. The judicious Chirurgus struck in as if nothing loath,
snack, snack; and made a great show of clipping. Friedrich Wilhelm
took a newspaper till the job were done; the judicious Barber,
still making a great show of work, combed back rather than cut off
these Apollo locks; did Fritz accurately into soaped club, to the
cursory eye; but left him capable of shaking out his chevelure
again on occasion,--to the lasting gratitude of Fritz. [Preuss,
i. 16.]


THE NOLTENIUS-AND-PANZENDORF DRILL-EXERCISE.

On the whole, as we said, a youth needs good assimilating power,
if he is to grow in this world! Noltenius aud Panzendorf, for
instance, they were busy "teaching Friedrich religion." Rather a
strange operation this too, if we were to look into it. We will
not look too closely. Another pair of excellent most solemn
drill-sergeants, in clerical black serge; they also are busy
instilling dark doctrines into the bright young Boy, so far as
possible; but do not seem at any time to have made too deep an
impression on him. May we not say that, in matter of religion too,
Friedrich was but ill-bested? Enlightened Edict-of-Nantes
Protestantism, a cross between Bayle and Calvin: that was but
indifferent babe's milk to the little creature. Nor could
Noltenius's Catechism, and ponderous drill-exercise in orthodox
theology, much inspire a clear soul with pieties, and tendencies
to soar Heavenward.

Alas, it is a dreary litter indeed, mere wagon-load on
wagon-load of shot-rubbish, that is heaped round this new human
plant, by Noltenius and Company, among others. A wonder only that
they did not extinguish all Sense of the Highest in the poor young
soul, and leave only a Sense of the Dreariest and Stupidest. But a
healthy human soul can stand a great deal. The healthy soul shakes
off, in an unexpectedly victorious manner, immense masses of dry
rubbish that have been shot upon it by its assiduous pedagogues
and professors. What would become of any of us otherwise! Duhan,
opening the young soul, by such modest gift as Duhan had, to
recognize black from white a little, in this embroiled high
Universe, is probably an exception in some small measure.
But, Duhan excepted, it may be said to have been in spite of most
of his teachers, and their diligent endeavors, that Friedrich did
acquire some human piety; kept the sense of truth alive in his
mind; knew, in whatever words he phrased it, the divine eternal
nature of Duty; and managed, in the muddiest element and most
eclipsed Age ever known, to steer by the heavenly loadstars and
(so we must candidly term it) to FOLLOW God's Law; in some
measure, with or without Noltenius for company. Noltenius's
CATECHISM, or ghostly Drill-manual for Fritz, at least the
Catechism he had plied Wilhelmina with, which no doubt was the
same, is still extant. [Preuss, i. 15;--specimens of it in
Rodenbeck.] A very abstruse Piece; orthodox Lutheran-Calvinist,
all proved from Scripture; giving what account it can of this
unfathomable Universe, to the young mind. To modern Prussians it
by no means shines as the indubitablest Theory of the Universe.
Indignant modern Prussians produce excerpts from it, of an
abstruse nature; and endeavor to deduce therefrom some of
Friedrich's aberrations in matters of religion, which became
notorious enough by and by. Alas, I fear, it would not have
been easy, even for the modern Prussian, to produce a perfect
Catechism for the use of Friedrich; this Universe still continues
a little abstruse!

And there is another deeper thing to be remarked: the notion of
"teaching" religion, in the way of drill-exercise; which is a very
strange notion, though a common one, and not peculiar to Noltenius
and Friedrich Wilhelm. Piety to God, the nobleness that inspires a
human soul to struggle Heavenward, cannot be "taught" by the most
exquisite catechisms,or the most industrious preachings and
drillings. No; alas, no. Only by far other methods,--chiefly by
silent continual Example, silently waiting for the favorable mood
and moment, and aided then by a kind of miracle, well enough named
"the grace of God,"--can that sacred contagion pass from soul into
soul. How much beyond whole Libraries of orthodox Theology is,
sometimes, the mute action, the unconscious look of a father, of a
mother, who HAD in them "Devoutness, pious Nobleness"! In whom the
young soul, not unobservant, though not consciously observing,
came at length to recognize it; to read it, in this irrefragable
manner: a seed planted thenceforth in the centre of his holiest
affections forevermore!

Noltenius wore black serge; kept the corners of his mouth well
down; and had written a Catechism of repute; but I know not that
Noltenius carried much seed of living piety about with him;
much affection from, or for, young Fritz he could not well carry.
On the whole, it is a bad outlook on the religious side;
and except in Apprenticeship to the rugged and as yet repulsive
Honesties of Friedrich Wilhelm, I see no good element in it.
Bayle-Calvin, with Noltenius and Catechisms of repute: there is no
"religion" to be had for a little Fritz out of all that.
Endless Doubt will be provided for him out of all that, probably
disbelief of all that;--and, on the whole, if any form at all, a
very scraggy form of moral existence; from which the Highest shall
be hopelessly absent; and in which anything High, anything not Low
and Lying, will have double merit.

It is indeed amazing what quantities and kinds of extinct ideas
apply for belief, sometimes in a menacing manner, to the poor mind
of man, and poor mind of child, in these days. They come bullying
in upon him, in masses, as if they were quite living ideas;
ideas of a dreadfully indispensable nature, the evident
counterpart, and salutary interpretation, of Facts round him,
which, it is promised the poor young creature, he SHALL recognize
to correspond with them, one day. At which "correspondence," when
the Facts are once well recognized, he has at last to ask himself
with amazement, "Did I ever recognize it, then?" Whereby come
results incalculable; not good results any of them;--some of them
unspeakably bad! The ease of Crown-Prince Friedrich in Berlin is
not singular; all cities and places can still show the like.
And when it will end, is not yet clear. But that it ever should
have begun, will one day be the astonishment. As if the divinest
function of a human being were not even that of believing;
of discriminating, with his God-given intellect, what is from what
is not; and as if the point were, to render that either an
impossible function, or else what we must sorrowfully call a
revolutionary, rebellious and mutinous one. O Noltenius,
O Panzendorf, do for pity's sake take away your Catechetical ware;
and say either nothing to the poor young Boy, or some small thing
he will find to be BEYOND doubt when he can judge of it!
Fever, pestilence, are bad for the body; but Doubt, impious
mutiny, doubly impious hypocrisy, are these nothing for the mind?
Who would go about inculcating Doubt, unless he were far astray
indeed, and much at a loss for employment!

But the sorest fact in Friedrich's schooling, the forest, for the
present, though it ultimately proved perhaps the most beneficent
one, being well dealt with by the young soul, and nobly subdued to
his higher uses, remains still to be set forth. Which will be a
long business, first and last!



Chapter XII.

CROWN-PRINCE FALLS INTO DISFAVOR WITH PAPA.

Those vivacities of young Fritz, his taste for music, finery,
those furtive excursions into the domain of Latin and forbidden
things, were distasteful and incomprehensible to Friedrich
Wilhelm: Where can such things end? They begin in disobedience and
intolerable perversity; they will be the ruin of Prussia and of
Fritz!--Here, in fact, has a great sorrow risen. We perceive the
first small cracks of incurable divisions in the royal household;
the breaking out of fountains of bitterness, which by and by
spread wide enough. A young sprightly, capricions and vivacious
Boy, inclined to self-will, had it been permitted; developing
himself into foreign tastes, into French airs and ways; very ill
seen by the heavy-footed practical Germanic Majesty.

The beginnings of this sad discrepancy are traceable from
Friedrich's sixth or seventh year: "Not so dirty, Boy!" And there
could be no lack of growth in the mutual ill-humor, while the Boy
himself continued growing; enlarging in bulk and in activity of
his own. Plenty of new children come, to divide our regard withal,
and more are coming; five new Princesses, wise little Ulrique the
youngest of them (named of Sweden and the happy Swedish Treaty),
whom we love much for her grave staid ways. Nay, next after
Ulrique comes even a new Prince; August Wilhelm, ten years younger
than Friedrich; and is growing up much more according to the
paternal heart. Pretty children, all of them, more or less;
and towardly, and comfortable to a Father;--and the worst of them
a paragon of beauty, in comparison to perverse, clandestine,
disobedient Fritz, with his French fopperies, flutings, and
cockatoo fashions of hair!--

And so the silent divulsion, silent on Fritz's part, exploding
loud enough now and then on his Father's part, goes steadily on,
splitting ever wider; new offences ever superadding themselves.
Till, at last, the rugged Father has grown to hate the son;
and longs, with sorrowful indignation, that it were possible to
make August Wilhelm Crown-Prince in his stead. This Fritz ought to
fashion himself according to his Father's pattern, a well-meant
honest pattern; and he does not! Alas, your Majesty, it cannot be.
It is the new generation come; which cannot live quite as the old
one did. A perennial controversy in human life; coeval with the
genealogies of men. This little Boy should have been the excellent
paternal Majesty's exact counterpart; resembling him at all
points, "as a little sixpence does a big half-crown:" but we
perceive he cannot. This is a new coin, with a stamp of its own.
A surprising FRIEDRICH D'OR this; and may prove a good piece yet;
but will never be the half-crown your Majesty requires!--

Conceive a rugged thick-sided Squire Western, of supreme degree,--
or this Squire Western is a hot Hohenzollern, and wears a crown
royal;--conceive such a burly NE-PLUS-ULTRA of a Squire, with his
broad-based rectitudes and surly irrefragabilities; the honest
German instincts of the man, convictions certain as the Fates, but
capable of no utterance, or next to none, in words; and that he
produces a Son who takes into Voltairism, piping, fiddling and
belles-lettres, with apparently a total contempt for Grumkow and
the giant-regiment! Sulphurous rage, in gusts or in lasting
tempests, rising from a fund of just implacability, is inevitable.
Such as we shall see.

The Mother, as mothers will, secretly favors Fritz; anxious to
screen him in the day of high-wind. Withal she has plans of her
own in regard to Fritz, and the others; being a lady of many
plans. That of the "Double-Marriage," for example; of marrying her
Prince and Princess to a Princess and Prince of the
English-Hanoverian House; it was a pleasant eligible plan,
consented to by Papa and the other parties; but when it came to be
perfected by treaty, amid the rubs of external and internal
politics, what new amazing discrepancies rose upon her poor
children and her! Fearfully aggravating the quarrel of Father and
Son, almost to the fatal point. Of that "Double-Marriage," whirled
up in a universe of intriguing diplomacies, in the "skirts of the
Kaiser's huge Spectre-Hunt," as we have called it, there will be
sad things to say by and by.

Plans her Majesty has; and silently a will of her own. She loves
all her children, especially Fritz, and would so love that they
loved her.--For the rest, all along, Fritz and Wilhelmina are sure
allies. We perceive they have fallen into a kind of cipher-speech;
[<italic> Memoires de Bareith, <end italic> i. 168.] they
communicate with one another by telegraphic signs. One of their
words, "RAGOTIN (Stumpy)," whom does the reader think it
designates? Papa himself, the Royal Majesty of Prussia, Friedrich
Wilhelm I., he to his rebellious children is tyrant "Stumpy," and
no better; being indeed short of stature, and growing ever
thicker, and surlier in these provocations!--

Such incurable discrepancies have risen in the Berlin Palace:
fountains of bitterness flowing ever wider, till they made life
all bitter for Son and for Father; necessitating the proud Son to
hypocrisies towards his terrible Father, which were very foreign
to the proud youth, had there been any other resource. But there
was none, now or afterwards. Even when the young man, driven to
reflection and insight by intolerable miseries, had begun to
recognize the worth of his surly Rhadamanthine Father, and the
intrinsic wisdom of much that he had meant with him, the Father
hardly ever could, or could only by fits, completely recognize the
Son's worth. Rugged suspicious Papa requires always to be humored,
cajoled, even when our feeling towards him is genuine and loyal.
Friedrich, to the last, we can perceive, has to assume masquerade
in addressing him, in writing to him,--and in spite of real love,
must have felt it a relief when such a thing was over. That is,
all along, a sad element of Friedrich's education! Out of which
there might have come incalculable damage to the young man, had
his natural assimilative powers, to extract benefit from all
things, been less considerable. As it was, he gained self-help
from it; gained reticence, the power to keep his own counsel;
and did not let the hypocrisy take hold of him, or be other than a
hateful compulsory masquerade. At an uncommonly early age, he
stands before us accomplished in endurance, for one thing; a very
bright young Stoic of his sort; silently prepared for the
injustices of men and things. And as for the masquerade, let us
hope it was essentially foreign even to the skin of the man! The
reader will judge as he goes on. <italic> "Je n'ai jamais trompe
personne durant ma vie, <end italic> I have never deceived anybody
during my life; still less will I deceive posterity," [<italic>
Memoires depuis la Paix de Huberrtsbourg, <end italic> 1763-1774
(Avant-Propos), OEUVRES, vii. 8.] writes Friedrich when his head
was now grown very gray.



Chapter XIII.

RESULTS OF THE CROWN-PRINCE'S SCHOOLING.

Neither as to intellectual culture, in Duhan's special sphere, and
with all Duhan's good-will, was the opportunity extremely golden.
It cannot be said that Friedrich, who spells in the way we saw,
"ASTEURE" for "A CETTE HEURE," has made shining acquisitions on
the literary side. However, in the long-run it becomes clear, his
intellect, roving on devious courses, or plodding along the
prescribed tram-roads, had been wide awake; and busy all the
while, bringing in abundant pabulum of an irregular nature.

He did learn "Arithmetic," "Geography," and the other useful
knowledges that were indispensable to him. He knows History
extensively; though rather the Roman, French, and general European
as the French have taught it him, than that of "Hessen, Brunswick,
England," or even the "Electoral and Royal House of Brandenburg,"
which Papa had recommended. He read History, where he could
find it readable, to the end of his life; and had early begun
reading it,--immensely eager to learn, in his little head, what
strange things had been, and were, in this strange Planet he was
come into.

We notice with pleasure a lively taste for facts in the little
Boy; which continued to be the taste of the Man, in an eminent
degree. Fictions he also knows; an eager extensive reader of what
is called Poetry, Literature, and himself a performer in that
province by and by: but it is observable how much of Realism there
always is in his Literature; how close, here as elsewhere, he
always hangs on the practical truth of things; how Fiction itself
is either an expository illustrative garment of Fact, or else is
of no value to him. Romantic readers of his Literature are much
disappointed in consequence, and pronounce it bad Literature;--and
sure enough, in several senses, it is not to be called good! Bad
Literature, they say; shallow, barren, most unsatisfactory to a
reader of romantic appetites. Which is a correct verdict, as to
the romantic appetites and it. But to the man himself, this
qualityof mind is of immense moment and advantage; and forms
truly the basis of all he was good for in life. Once for all, he
has no pleasure in dreams, in parti-colored clouds and
nothingnesses. All his curiosities gravitate towards what exists,
what has being and reality round him. That is the significant
thing to him; that he would right gladly know, being already
related to that, as friend or as enemy; and feeling an unconscious
indissoluble kinship, who shall say of what importance, towards
all that. For he too is a little Fact, big as can be to himself;
and in the whole Universe there exists nothing as fact but is a
fellow-creature of his.

That our little Fritz tends that way, ought to give Noltenius,
Finkenstein and other interested parties, the very highest
satisfaction. It is an excellent symptom of his intellect, this of
gravitating irresistibly towards realities. Better symptom of its
quality (whatever QUANTITY there be of it), human intellect cannot
show for itself. However it may go with Literature, and
satisfaction to readers of romantic appetites, this young soul
promises to become a successful Worker one day, and to DO
something under the Sun. For work is of an extremely unfictitious
nature; and no man can roof his house with clouds and moonshine,
so as to turn the rain from him.

It is also to be noted that his style of French, though he spelt
it so ill, and never had the least mastery of punctuation, has
real merit. Rapidity, easy vivacity, perfect clearness, here and
there a certain quaint expressiveness: on the whole, he had
learned the Art of Speech, from those old French Governesses, in
those old and new French Books of his. We can also say of his
Literature, of what he hastily wrote in mature life, that it has
much more worth, even as Literature, than the common romantic
appetite assigns to it. A vein of distinct sense, and good
interior articulation, is never wanting in that thin-flowing
utterance. The true is well riddled out from amid the false;
the important and essential are alone given us, the unimportant
and superfluous honestly thrown away. A lean wiry veracity (an
immense advantage in any Literature, good or bad!) is everywhere
beneficently observable; the QUALITY of the intellect always
extremely good, whatever its quantity may be.

It is true, his spelling--"ASTEURE" for "A CETTE HEURE"--is very
bad. And as for punctuation, he never could understand the mystery
of it; he merely scatters a few commas and dashes, as if they were
shaken out of a pepper-box upon his page, and so leaves it.
These are deficiencies lying very bare to criticism; and I confess
I never could completely understand them in such a man. He that
would have ordered arrest for the smallest speck of mud on a man's
buff-belt, indignant that any pipe-clayed portion of a man should
not be perfectly pipeclayed: how could he tolerate false spelling,
and commas shaken as out of a pepper-box over his page? It is
probable he cared little about Literature, after all; cared, at
least, only about the essentials of it; had practically no
ambition for himself, or none considerable, in that kind;--and so
might reckon exact obedience and punctuality, in a soldier, more
important than good spelling to an amateur literary man: He never
minded snuff upon his own chin, not even upon his waistcoat and
breeches: A merely superficial thing, not worth bothering about,
in the press of real business!--

That Friedrich's Course of Education did on the whole prosper, in
spite of every drawback, is known to all men. He came out of it a
man of clear and ever-improving intelligence; equipped with
knowledge, true in essentials, if not punctiliously exact, upon
all manner of practical and speculative things, to a degree not
only unexampled among modern Sovereign Princes so called, but such
as to distinguish him even among the studious class. Nay many
"Men-of-Letters" have made a reputation for themselves with but a
fraction of the real knowledge concerning men and things, past and
present, which Friedrich was possessed of. Already at the time
when action came to be demanded of him, he was what we must call a
well-informed and cultivated man; which character he never ceased
to merit more and more; and as for the action, and the actions,--
we shall see whether he was fit for these or not.

One point of supreme importance in his education was all along
made sure of, by the mere presence and presidence of Friedrich
Wilhelm in the business: That there was an inflexible law of
discipline everywhere active in it; that there was a Spartan
rigor, frugality, veracity inculcated upon him. "Economy he is to
study to the bottom;" and not only so, but, in another sense of
the word, he is to practise economy; and does, or else suffers for
not doing it. Economic of his time, first of all: generally every
other noble economy will follow out of that, if a man once
understand and practise that. Here was a truly valuable foundation
laid; and as for the rest, Nature, in spite of shot-rubbish, had
to do what she could in the rest.

But Nature had been very kind to this new child of hers.
And among, the confused hurtful elements of his Schooling, there
was always, as we say, this eminently salutary and most potent
one, of its being, in the gross, APPRENTICESHIP TO FRIEDRICH
WILHELM the Rhadamanthine Spartan King, who hates from his heart
all empty Nonsense, and Unveracity most of all. Which one element,
well aided by docility, by openness and loyalty of mind, on the
Pupil's part, proved at length sufficient to conquer the others;
as it were to burn up all the others, and reduce their sour dark
smoke, abounding everywhere, into flame and illumination mostly.
This radiant swift-paced Son owed much to the surly, irascible,
sure-footed Father that bred him. Friedrich did at length see into
Friedrich Wilhelm, across the abstruse, thunderous, sulphurous
embodiments and accompaniments of the man;--and proved himself,
in all manner of important respects, the filial sequel of
Friedrich Wilhelm. These remarks of a certain Editor are perhaps
worth adding:--

"Friedrich Wilhelm, King of Prussia, did not set up for a
Pestalozzi; and the plan of Education for his Son is open to
manifold objections. Nevertheless, as Schoolmasters go, I much
prefer him to most others we have at present. The wild man had
discerned, with his rugged natural intelligence (not wasted away
in the idle element of speaking and of being spoken to, but kept
wholesomely silent for most part), That human education is not,
and cannot be, a thing of VOCABLES. That it is a thing of earnest
facts; of capabilities developed, of habits established, of
dispositions well dealt with, of tendencies confirmed and
tendencies repressed:--a laborious separating of the character
into two FIRMAMENTS; shutting down the subterranean, well down and
deep; an earth and waters, and what lies under them; then your
everlasting azure sky, and immeasurable depths of aether, hanging
serene overhead. To make of the human soul a Cosmos, so far as
possible, that was Friedrich Wilhelm's dumb notion: not to leave
the human soul a mere Chaos;--how much less a Singing or
eloquently Spouting Chaos, which is ten times worse than a Chaos
left MUTE, confessedly chaotic and not cosmic! To develop the man
into DOING something; and withal into doing it as the Universe and
the Eternal Laws require,--which is but another name for really
doing and not merely seeming to do it:--that was Friedrich
Wilhelm's dumb notion: and it was, I can assure you, very far from
being a foolish one, though there was no Latin in it, and much of
Prussian pipe-clay!"

But the Congress of Cambrai is met, and much else is met and
parted: and the Kaiser's Spectre-Hunt, especially his Duel with
the She-Dragon of Spain, is in full course; and it is time we
were saying something of the Double-Marriage in a directly
narrative way.



END OF BOOK IV, 





End of Project Gutenberg's Etext History of Friedrich II of Prussia V 4

