The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Origins of Contemporary France
#4 in our series by Hippolyte A. Taine

The French Revolution, Volume 3
The Origins of Contemporary France, Volume 4


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Title:  The French Revolution, Volume 3
Title:  The Origins of Contemporary France, Volume 4

Author:  Hippolyte A. Taine

April, 2001  [Etext #2580]
[Most recently updated December 15, 2002]

The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Origins of Contemporary France
*******This file should be named 04ocf10.txt or 04ocf10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 04ocf11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 04ocf10a.txt

This Etext prepared by Svend Rom.

Translated by John Durand.  Slightly corrected and
normalized by Svend Rom, whose remarks are signed (SR.)


Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp metalab.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

We are planning on making some changes in our donation structure
in 2000, so you might want to email me, hart@pobox.com beforehand.




*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





This Etext prepared by Svend Rom <svendrom@aol.com>





The French Revolution, Volume 1.
^M                                            
The Origins of Contemporary France, Volume 2^M
^M                                            
by Hippolyte A. Taine^M 




THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VOLUME III.
PREFACE.
BOOK FIRST. The Establishment of the Revolutionary Government.
CHAPTER I.
BOOK SECOND. The Jacobin Program.
CHAPTER I.
CHAPTER II.
BOOK THIRD. The Governors.
CHAPTER I. Psychology of the Jacobin Leaders.
CHAPTER II. The Rulers of the Country.
CHAPTER III. The Rulers. (continued).
BOOK FOURTH.  The Governed.
CHAPTER I. The Oppressed.
CHAPTER II. Food and Provisions.
BOOK FIFTH.   The End of the Revolutionary Government.
CHAPTER I.




PREFACE.

"In Egypt," says Clement of Alexandria,[1] "the sanctuaries of the
temples are shaded by curtains of golden tissue.   But on going
further into the interior in quest of the statue, a priest of grave
aspect, advancing to meet you and chanting a hymn in the Egyptian
tongue, slightly raises a veil to show you the god.   And what do you
behold? A crocodile, or some indigenous serpent, or other dangerous
animal, the Egyptian god being a beast sprawling on a purple carpet."

We need not visit Egypt or go so far back in history to encounter
crocodile worship, as this can be readily found in France at the end
of the last century.   -- Unfortunately, a hundred years is too long
an interval, too far away, for an imaginative retrospect of the past.
At the present time, standing where we do and regarding the horizon
behind us, we see only forms which the intervening atmosphere
embellishes, shimmering contours which each spectator may interpret in
his own fashion; no distinct, animated figure, but merely a mass of
moving points, forming and dissolving in the midst of picturesque
architecture.   I was anxious to take a closer view of these vague
points, and, accordingly, deported myself back to the last half of the
eighteenth century.   I have now been living with them for twelve
years, and, like Clement of Alexandria, examined, first, the temple,
and next the god.   A passing glance at these is not sufficient; it
was also necessary to understand the theology on which this cult is
founded.   This one, explained by a very specious theology, like most
others, is composed of dogmas called the principles of 1789; they were
proclaimed, indeed, at that date, having been previously formulated by
Jean-Jacques Rousseau:

* The well known sovereignty of the people.

* The rights of Man.

* The social contract.

Once adopted, their practical results unfolded themselves naturally.
In three years these dogmas installed the crocodile on the purple
carpet insides the sanctuary behind the golden veil.  He was selected
for the place on account of the energy of his jaws and the capacity of
his stomach; he became a god through his qualities as a destructive
brute and man-eater.  -- Comprehending this, the rites which
consecrate him and the pomp which surrounds him need not give us any
further concern. -- We can observe him, like any ordinary animal, and
study his various attitudes, as he lies in wait for his prey, springs
upon it, tears it to pieces, swallows it, and digests it.  I have
studied the details of his structure, the play of his organs, his
habits, his mode of living, his instincts, his faculties, and his
appetites.  -- Specimens abounded.  I have handled thousands of them,
and have dissected hundreds of every species and variety, always
preserving the most valuable and characteristic examples, but for lack
of room I have been compelled to let many of them go because my
collections was too large.  Those that I was able to bring back with
me will be found here, and, among others, about twenty individuals of
different dimensions, which -- a difficult undertaking -- I have kept
alive with great pains.  At all events, they are intact and perfect,
and particularly the three largest.  These seem to me, of their kind,
truly remarkable, and those in which the divinity of the day might
well incarnate himself.  - Authentic and rather well kept cookbooks
inform us about the cost of the cult: We can more or less estimate how
much the sacred crocodiles consumed in ten years; we know their bills
of daily fare, their favorite morsels.  Naturally, the god selected
the fattest victims, but his voracity was so great that he likewise
bolted down, and blindly, the lean ones, and in much greater number
than the fattest.  Moreover, by virtue of his instincts, and an
unfailing effect of the situation, he ate his equals once or twice a
year, except when they succeeded in eating him.  -- This cult
certainly is instructive, at least to historians and men of pure
science.  If any believers in it still remain I do not aim to convert
them; one cannot argue with a devotee on matters of faith.  This
volume, accordingly, like the others that have gone before it, is
written solely for amateurs of moral zoology, for naturalists of the
understanding, for seekers of truth, of texts, and of proofs -- for
these alone and not for the public, whose mind is made up and which
has its own opinion on the Revolution.  This opinion began to be
formed between 1825 and 1830, after the retirement or withdrawal of
eye witnesses.  When they disappeared it was easy to convince a
credulous public that crocodiles were philanthropists; that many
possessed genius; that they scarcely ate others than the guilty, and
that if they sometimes ate too many it was unconsciously and in spite
of themselves, or through devotion and self-sacrifice for the common
good.

H. A. Taine,   Menthon Saint Bernard, July 1884.

___________________________________________________________________


BOOK FIRST.  THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT.

CHAPTER I.

I.

Weakness of former governments.  - Energy of the new government.  -
The despotic creed and instincts of the Jacobin.


So far, the weakness of the legal government is extreme.  During four
years, whatever its kind, it has constantly and everywhere been
disobeyed.  For four years it never dared enforce obedience.
Recruited among the cultivated and refined class, the rulers of the
country have brought with them into power the prejudices and
sensibilities of the epoch.  Under the influence of the prevailing
dogma they have submitted to the will of the multitude and, with too
much faith in the rights of Man, they have had too little in the
authority of the magistrate.  Moreover, through humanity, they have
abhorred bloodshed and, unwilling to repress, they have allowed
themselves to be repressed.  Thus from the 1st of May, 1789, to June
2, 1793, they have administrated or legislated, escaping countless
insurrections, almost all of them going unpunished ; while their
constitution, an unhealthy product of theory and fear, have done no
more than transform spontaneous anarchy into legal anarchy.
Deliberately and through distrust of authority they have undermined
the principle of command, reduced the King to the post of a decorative
puppet, and almost annihilated the central power: from the top to the
bottom of the hierarchy the superior has lost his hold on the
inferior, the minister on the departments, the departments on the
districts, and the districts on the communes.  Throughout all branches
of the service, the chief, elected on the spot and by his
subordinates, has come to depend on them.  Thenceforth, each post in
which authority is vested is found isolated, dismantled and preyed
upon, while, to crown all, the Declaration of Rights, proclaiming "the
jurisdiction of constituents over their clerks,"[2] has invited the
assailants to make the assault.  On the strength of this a faction
arises which ends in becoming an organized band ; under its clamor,
its menaces and its pikes, at Paris and in the provinces, at the polls
and in the parliament, the majorities are all silenced, while the
minorities vote, decree and govern; the Legislative Assembly is
purged, the King is dethroned, and the Convention is mutilated.  Of
all the garrisons of the central citadel, whether royalists,
Constitutionalists, or Girondins, not one has been able to defend
itself, to re-fashion the executive instrument, to draw the sword and
use it in the streets: on the first attack, often at the first
summons, all have surrendered, and now the citadel, with every other
public fortress, is in the hands of the Jacobins.


This time, its occupants are of a different stamp.  Aside from the
great mass of well-disposed people fond of a quiet life, the
Revolution has sifted out and separated from the rest all who are
fanatical, brutal or perverse enough to have lost respect for others;
these form the new garrison -- sectarians blinded by their creed, the
roughs (assommeurs) who are hardened by their calling, and those who
make all they can out of their offices.  None of this class are
scrupulous concerning human life or property ; for, as we have seen,
they have shaped the theory to suit themselves, and reduced popular
sovereignty to their sovereignty.  The commonwealth, according to the
Jacobin, is his; with him, the commonwealth comprises all private
possessions, bodies, estates, souls and consciences; everything
belongs to him; the fact of being a Jacobin makes him legitimately
czar and pope.  Little does he care about the wills of actually living
Frenchmen; his mandate does not emanate from a vote ; it descends to
him from aloft, conferred on him by Truth, by Reason, by Virtue.  As
he alone is enlightened, and the only patriot, he alone is worthy to
take command, while resistance, according to his imperious pride, is
criminal.  If the majority protests it is because the majority is
imbecile or corrupt; in either case, it deserves to be brought to
heel.  And, in fact, the Jacobin only does that and right away too;
insurrections, usurpations, pillaging, murders, assaults on
individuals, on judges and public attorneys, on assemblies, violations
of law, attacks on the State, on communities -- there is no outrage
not committed by him.  He has always acted as sovereign instinctively
; he was so as a private individual and clubbist; he is not to cease
being so, now that he possesses legal authority, and all the more
because if he hesitates he knows he is lost; to save himself from the
scaffold he has no refuge but in a dictatorship.  Such a man, unlike
his predecessors, will not allow himself to be turned out; on the
contrary, he will exact obedience at any cost.  He will not hesitate
to restore the central power; he will put back the local wheels that
have been detached; he will repair the old forcing gear; he will set
it agoing so as to work more rudely and arbitrarily than ever, with
greater contempt for private rights and public liberties than either a
Louis XIV.  or a Napoleon.



II.    Jacobin Dissimulation.

Contrast between his words and his acts.  - How he dissimulates his
change of front.  --  The Constitution of June, 1793.  - Its promises
of freedom.

In the mean time, he has to harmonize his coming acts with his recent
declarations, which, at the first glance, seems a difficult operation:
for, in the speeches he has made he has already condemned the actions
he meditates.  Yesterday he exaggerated the rights of the governed,
even to a suppression of those of the government; to-morrow he is to
exaggerate the rights of the people in power, even to suppressing
those who are governed.  The people, as he puts it, is the sole
sovereign, and he is going to treat the people as slaves; the
government, as he puts it, is a valet, and he is going to endow the
government with prerogatives of a sultan.  He has just denounced the
slightest exercise of public authority as a crime; he is now going to
punish as a crime the slightest resistance to public authority.  What
will justify such a volte-face and with what excuse can he repudiate
the principles with which he justified his takeover? -- He takes good
care not to repudiate them; it would drive the already rebellious
provinces to extremes; on the contrary, he proclaims them with renewed
vigor, through which move the ignorant crowd, seeing the same flask
always presented to it, imagines that it is always served with the
same liquor, and is thus forced to drink tyranny under the label of
freedom.  Whatever the charlatan can do with his labels, signboards,
shouting and lies for the next six months, will be done to disguise
the new nostrum; so much the worse for the public if, later on, it
discovers that the draught is bitter; sooner or later it must swallow
it, willingly or by compulsion: for, in the interval, the instruments
are being got ready to force it down the public throat.[3]

As a beginning, the Constitution, so long anticipated and so often
promised, is hastily fabricated:[4] declarations of rights in thirty-
five articles, the Constitutional bill in one hundred and twenty-four
articles, political principles and institutions of every sort,
electoral, legislative, executive, administrative, judicial, financial
and military;[5] in three weeks all is drawn up and passed on the
double.  -- Of course, the new Constitutionalists do not propose to
produce an effective and serviceable instrument; that is the least of
their worries.  Hérault Séchelles, the reporter of the bill, writes on
the 7th of June, "to have procured for him at once the laws of Minos,
of which he has urgent need;" very urgent need, as he must hand in the
Constitution that week.[6] Such circumstance is sufficiently
characteristic of both the workmen and the work.  All is mere show and
pretense.  Some of the workmen are shrewd politicians whose sole
object is to furnish the public with words instead of realities;
others, ordinary scribblers of abstractions, or even ignoramuses, and
unable to distinguish words from reality, imagine that they are
framing laws by stringing together a lot of phrases.  -- It is not a
difficult job; the phrases are ready-made to hand.  "Let the plotters
of anti-popular systems," says the reporter, "painfully elaborate
their projects! Frenchmen .  .  .  .  have only to consult their
hearts to read the Republic there!"[7] Drafted in accordance with the
"Contrat-Social," filled with Greek and Latin reminiscences, it is a
summary "in pithy style" of the manual of current aphorisms then in
vogue, Rousseau's mathematical formulas and prescriptions, "the axioms
of truth and the consequences flowing from these axioms," in short, a
rectilinear constitution which any school-boy may spout on leaving
college.  Like a handbill posted on the door of a new shop, it
promises to customers every imaginable article that is handsome and
desirable.  Would you have rights and liberties? You will find them
all here.  Never has the statement been so clearly made, that the
government is the servant, creature and tool of the governed; it is
instituted solely "to guarantee to them their natural, imprescriptible
rights." [8] Never has a mandate been more strictly limited: "The
right of expressing one's thoughts and opinions, either through the
press or in any other way; the right of peaceful assembly, the free
exercise of worship, cannot be interdicted." Never have citizens been
more carefully guarded against the encroachments and excesses of
public authority: "The law should protect public and private liberties
against the oppression of those who govern .  .  .  offenses committed
by the people's mandatories and agents must never go unpunished.  Let
free men instantly put to death every individual usurping sovereignty.
.  .  Every act against a man outside of the cases and forms which the
law determines is arbitrary and tyrannical; whosoever is subjected to
violence in the execution of this act has the right to repel it by
force.  .  .  When the government violates the people's rights
insurrection is, for the people and for each portion of the people,
the most sacred of rights and the most indispensable of duties."

To civil rights the generous legislator has added political rights,
and multiplied every precaution for maintaining the dependence of
rulers on the people.  -- In the first place, rulers are appointed by
the people and through direct choice or nearly direct choice: in
primary meetings the people elect deputies, city officers, justices of
the peace, and electors of the second degree; the latter, in their
turn, elect in the secondary meetings, district and department
administrators, civil arbitrators, criminal judges, judges of appeal
and the eighty candidates from amongst which the legislative body is
to select its executive council.  -- In the second place, all powers
of whatever kind are never conferred except for a very limited term:
one year for deputies, for electors of the second degree, for civil
arbitrators, and for judges of every kind and class.  As to
municipalities and also department and district administrations, these
are one-half renewable annually.  Every first of May the fountain-head
of authority flows afresh, the people in its primary assemblies,
spontaneously formed, manifesting or changing at will its staff of
clerks.  -- In the third place, even when installed and at work, the
people may, if it pleases, become their collaborator: means are
provided for "deliberating" with its deputies.  The latter, on
incidental questions, those of slight importance, on the ordinary
business of the year, may enact laws; but on matters of general,
considerable and permanent interest, they are simply to propose the
laws, while, especially as regards a declaration of war, the people
alone must decide.  The people have a suspensive veto and, finally, a
definitive veto, which they may exercise when they please.  To this
end, they may assemble in extraordinary session; one-fifth of the
citizens who have the right to vote suffice for their convocation.
Once convoked, the vote is determined by a Yes or a No on the act
proposed by the legislative body.  If, at the expiration of forty
days, one-tenth of the primary assemblies in one-half of the
departments vote No, there is a suspensive veto.  In that event all
the primary assemblies of the Republic must be convoked and if the
majority still decides in the negative, that is a definitive veto.
The same formalities govern a revision of the established
constitution.  -- In all this, the plan of the "Montagnards" is a
further advance on that of the Girondins; never was so insignificant a
part assigned to the rulers nor so extensive a part to the governed.
The Jacobins profess a respect for the popular initiative which
amounts to a scruple.[9] According to them the sovereign people should
be sovereign de facto, permanently, and without interregnum, allowed
to interfere in all serious affairs, and not only possess the right,
but the faculty, of imposing its will on its mandatories.  -- All the
stronger is the reason for referring to it the institutions now being
prepared for it.  Hence the Convention, after the parade is over,
convokes the primary assemblies and submits to them for ratification
the Constitutional bill has been drawn up.



III.

Primary Assemblies.  - Proportion of Absentees.  -- Unanimity of the
voters.  -- Their motives for accepting the Constitution.  -- Pressure
brought to bear on voters.  -  Choice of Delegates.

The ratification will, undoubtedly, be approved.  Everything has been
combined beforehand to secure it, also to secure it as wanted,
apparently spontaneously, and almost unanimously.  -- The primary
assemblies, indeed, are by no means fully attended; only one-half, or
a quarter, or a third of the electors in the cities deposit their
votes, while in the rural districts there is only a quarter, and
less.[10]  Repelled by their experience with previous convocations the
electors know too well the nature of these assemblies; how the Jacobin
faction rules them, how it manages the electoral comedy, with what
violence and threats it reduces all dissidents to voting either as
figurants or claqueurs.  From four to five million of electors prefer
to hold aloof and stay at home as usual.  Nevertheless the
organization of most of the assemblies takes place, amounting to some
six or seven thousand.  This is accounted for by the fact that each
canton contains its small group of Jacobins.  Next to these come the
simple-minded who still believe in official declarations; in their
eyes a constitution which guarantees private rights and institutes
public liberties must be accepted, no matter what hand may present it
to them.  And all the more readily because the usurpers offer to
resign; in effect, the Convention has just solemnly declared that once
the Constitution is adopted, the people shall again be convoked to
elect "a new national assembly .  .  .  a new representative body
invested with a later and more immediate trust,"[11] which will allow
electors, if they are so disposed, to return honest deputies and
exclude the knaves who now rule.  Thereupon even the insurgent
departments, the mass of the Girondins population, after a good deal
of hesitation, resign themselves at last to voting for it.[12]  This
is done at Lyons and in the department of Calvados only on the 30th of
July.  A number of Constitutionalists or neutrals have done the same
thing, some through a horror of civil war and a spirit of
conciliation, and others through fear of persecution and of being
taxed with royalism;[13] one conception more: through docility they
may perhaps succeed in depriving the "Mountain" of all pretext for
violence.

In this they greatly deceive themselves, and, from the first, they are
able to see once more the Jacobins interpretation of electoral
liberty.  -- At first, all the registered,[14] and especially the
"suspects," are compelled to vote, and to vote Yes; otherwise, says a
Jacobin journal,[15] "they themselves will indicate the true opinion
one ought to have of their attitudes, and no longer have reason to
complain of suspicions that are found to be so well grounded." They
come accordingly, "very humbly and very penitent." Nevertheless they
meet with a rebuff, and a cold shoulder is turned on them; they are
consigned to a corner of the room, or near the doors, and are openly
insulted.  Thus received, it is clear that they will keep quiet and
not risk the slightest objection.  At Macon "a few aristocrats
muttered to themselves, but not one dared say No."[16] It would,
indeed, be extremely imprudent.  At Montbrison, "six individuals who
decline to vote," are denounced in the procès-verbal of the Canton,
while a deputy in the Convention demands "severe measures" against
them.  At Nogent-sur-Seine, three administrators, guilty of the same
offense, are to be turned out of office.[17]  A few months later, the
offense becomes a capital crime, and people are to be guillotined "for
having voted against the Constitution of 1793."[18]  Almost all the
ill-disposed foresaw this danger; hence, in nearly all the primary
assemblies, the adoption is unanimous, or nearly unanimous.[19]  At
Rouen, there are but twenty-six adverse votes; at Caen, the center of
the Girondin opposition, fourteen; at Rheims, there are only two; at
Troyes, Besançon, Limoges and Paris, there are none at all; in fifteen
departments the number of negatives varies from five to one; not one
is found in Var; this apparent unity is most instructive.  The
commune of St.  Donau, the only one in France, in the remote district
of Cotês-du-Nord, dares demand the restoration of the clergy and the
son of Capet for king.  All the others vote as if directed with a
baton; they have understood the secret of the plebiscite; that it is a
Jacobin demonstration, not an honest vote, which is required.[20]  The
operation undertaken by the local party is actually carried out.  It
beats to arms around the ballot-box; it arrives in force; it alone
speaks with authority; it animates officers; it moves all the
resolutions and draws up the report of proceedings, while the
representatives on mission from Paris add to the weight of the local
authority that of the central authority.  In the Macon assembly "they
address the people on each article; this speech is followed by immense
applause and redoubled shouting of Vive la République! Vive la
Constitution! Vive le Peuple Français! " Beware, ye lukewarm, who do
not join in the chorus! They are forced to vote "in a loud,
intelligible voice." They are required to shout in unison, to sign the
grandiloquent address in which the leaders testify their gratitude to
the Convention, and give their adhesion to the eminent patriots
delegated by the primary assembly to bear its report to Paris.[21]



IV.

The Delegates reach Paris.  -- Precautions taken against them.  --
Constraints and Seductions.

The first act of the comedy is over and the second act now begins.--
The faction has convoked the delegates of the primary assemblies to
Paris for a purpose.  Like the primary assemblies, they are to serve
as its instruments for governing; they are to form the props of
dictatorship, and the object now is to restrict them to that task
only.  -- Indeed, it is not certain that all will lend themselves to
it.  For, among the eight thousand commissioners, some, appointed by
refractory assemblies, bring a refusal instead of an adhesion;[22]
others, more numerous, are instructed to present objections and point
out omissions:[23] it is very certain that the envoys of the Girondist
departments will insist on the release or return of their excluded
representatives.  And lastly, a good many delegates who have accepted
the Constitution in good faith desire its application as soon as
possible, and that the Convention should fulfill its promise of
abdication, so as to give way to a new Assembly.  - As it is important
to suppress at once all these vague desires for independence or
tendencies for opposition a decree of the Convention "authorizes the
Committee of General Security to order the arrest of 'suspect'
commissioners;" it is especially to look after those who, "charged
with a special mission, would hold meetings to win over their
colleagues, .  .  .  .  and engage them in proceedings contrary to
their mandate."[24] In the first place, and before they are admitted
into Paris, their Jacobinism is to be verified, like a bale in the
customs-house, by the special agents of the executive council, and
especially by Stanislas Maillard, the famous September judge, and his
sixty-eight bearded ruffians, each receiving pay at five francs a day.
"On all the roads, within a circuit of fifteen or twenty leagues of
the capital," the delegates are searched; their trunks are opened, and
their letters read.  At the barriers in Paris they find "inspectors"
posted by the Commune, under the pretext of protecting them against
prostitutes and swindlers.  There, they are taken possession of, and
conducted to the mayoralty, where they receive lodging tickets, while
a picket of gendarmerie escorts them to their allotted domiciles.[25]
-- Behold them in pens like sheep, each in his numbered stall; there
is no fear of the dissidents trying to escape and form a band apart:
one of them, who comes to the Convention and asks for a separate hall
for himself and his adherents, is snubbed in the most outrageous
manner; they denounce him as an intriguer, and accuse him of a desire
to defend the traitor Castries; they take his name and credentials,
and threaten him with an investigation.[26] The unfortunate speaker
hears the Abbaye alluded to, and evidently thinks himself fortunate to
escape sleeping there that night.  -- After this, it is certain that
he will not again demand the privilege of speaking, and that his
colleagues will remain quiet; and all this is the more likely

* because the revolutionary tribunal holds permanent sessions under
their eyes,

* because the guillotine is set up and in operation on the "Place de
la Révolution;"

* because a recent act of the Commune enjoins on the police "the most
active surveillance" and "constant patrols" by the armed force;

* because, from the first to the fourth of August, the barriers are
closed;

* because, on the 2nd of August, a raid into three of the theaters
puts five hundred young men in the lock-up,[27]

so the discontented soon discover, if there are any, that this is not
the time or the place to protest.

As to the others, already Jacobin, the faction takes it upon itself to
render them still more so.  -- Lost in the immensity of Paris, all
these provincials require moral as well as physical guides; it agrees
to exercise toward them "hospitality in all its plenitude, the
sweetest of Republican virtues."[28] Hence, ninety-six sans-culottes,
selected from among the sections, wait on them at the Mayoralty to
serve as their correspondents, and perhaps as their guarantees, and
certainly as pilots

* to give them lodging-tickets,

* to escort and install them,

* to indoctrinate them, as formerly with the federates of July, 1792,

* to prevent their getting into bad company,

* to introduce them into all the exciting meetings,

* to see that their ardent patriotism quickly rises to the proper
temperature of Parisian Jacobinism.[29]

The theaters must not offend their eyes or ears with pieces "opposed
to the spirit of the Revolution."[30] An order is issued for the
performance three times a week of "republican tragedies, such as
'Brutus', 'William Tell', 'Caius Gracchus,' and other dramas suitable
for the maintenance of the principles of equality and liberty." Once a
week the theaters must be free, when Chéniér's alexandrines are
spouted on the stage to the edification of the delegates, crowded into
the boxes at the expense of the State.  The following morning, led in
groups into the tribunes of the Convention,[31] they there find the
same, classic, simple, declamatory, sanguinary tragedy, except that
the latter is not feigned but real, and the tirades are in prose
instead of in verse.  Surrounded by paid yappers like victims for the
ancient Romans celebrations of purifications, our provincials applaud,
cheer and get excited, the same as on the night before at the signal
given by the claqueurs and the regulars.  Another day, the procureur-
syndic Lhullier summons them to attend the "Evéché," to "fraternize
with the authorities of the Paris department;"[32] the "Fraternité"
section invites them to its daily meetings; the Jacobin club lends
them its vast hall in the morning and admits them to its sessions in
the evening.  -- Thus monopolized and kept, as in a diving bell, they
breathe in Paris nothing but a Jacobin atmosphere; from one Jacobin
den to another, as they are led about in this heated atmosphere, their
pulse beats more rapidly.  Many of them, who, on their arrival, were
"plain, quiet people,"[33] but out of their element, subjected to
contagion without any antidote, quickly catch the revolutionary fever.
The same as at an American revival, under the constant pressure of
preaching and singing, of shouts and nervous spasms, the lukewarm and
even the indifferent have not long to wait before the delirium puts
them in harmony with the converted.



V.

They make their profession of Jacobin faith.  -- Their part in the
Fête of August 10th.  -- Their enthusiasm.

On the 7th of August things come to a head.  -- Led by the department
and the municipality, a number of delegates march to the bar of the
Convention, and make a confession of Jacobin faith.  "Soon," they
exclaim, "will search be made on the banks of the Seine for the foul
marsh intended to engulf us.  Were the royalist and intriguers to die
of spite, we will live and die 'Montagnards.'"[34]  Applause and
embraces.  -- From thence they betake themselves to the Jacobin Club,
where one of them proposes an address prepared beforehand: the object
of this is to justify the 31st of May, and the 2nd of June, "to open
the eyes" of provincial France, to declare "war against the
federalists."[35] "Down with the infamous libelers who have
calumniated Paris! ....  We cherish but one sentiment, our souls are
all melted into one ...  We form here but one vast, terrible mountain,
about to vomit forth its fires on the royalists and supporters of
tyranny." Applause and cheers.  -- Robespierre declares that they are
there to save the country.[36] On the following day, August 8th, this
address is presented to the Convention and Robespierre has a
resolution adopted, ordering it to be sent to the armies, to foreign
powers and all the Communes.  More applause, more embraces, and more
cheers.  -- On the 9th of August,[37] by order of the Convention, the
delegates meet in the Tuileries garden, where, divided into as many
groups as there are departments, they study the program drawn up by
David, in order to familiarize themselves with the parts they are to
play in the festival of the following day.

What an odd festival and how well it expresses the spirit of the time!
It is a sort of opera played in the streets by the public authorities,
with triumphant chariots, altars, censers, an Ark of the Covenant,
funeral urns, classic banners and other trappings! Its divinities
consist of plaster statues representing Nature, Liberty, the People,
and Hercules, all of which are personified abstractions, like those
painted on the ceiling of a theater.  In all this there is no
spontaneity nor sincerity; the actors, whose consciences tell them
that they are only actors, render homage to symbols which they know to
be nothing but symbols, while the mechanical procession,[38] the
invocations, the apostrophes, the postures, the gestures are regulated
beforehand, the same as by a ballet-manager.  To any truth-loving
person all this must seem like a charade performed by puppets.  -- But
the festival is colossal, well calculated to stimulate the imagination
and excite pride through physical excitement.[39] On this grandiose
stage the delegates become quite intoxicated with their part; for,
evidently, theirs is the leading part; they represent twenty-six
millions of Frenchmen, and the sole object of this ceremony is to
glorify the national will of which they are the bearers.  -- On the
Place de la Bastille[40] where the gigantic effigy of nature pours
forth from its two breasts "the regenerating water," Hérault, the
president, after offering libations and saluting the new goddess,
passes the cup to the eighty-seven elders (les doyens) of the eighty-
seven departments, each "summoned by sound of drum and trumpet" to
step forward and drink in his turn, while cannon belch forth their
thunders as if for a monarch.  After the eighty-seven have passed the
cup around, the artillery roars.  The procession them moves on, and
the delegates again are assigned the place of honor.  The elders,
holding an olive-branch in one hand, and a pike in the other, with a
streamer on the end of it bearing the name of their department, "bound
to each other by a small three-color ribbon," surround the Convention
as if to convey the idea that the nation maintains and conducts its
legal representative.  Behind them march the rest of the eight
thousand delegates, likewise holding olive-branches and forming a
second distinct body, the largest of all, and on which all eyes are
centered.  For, in their wake, "their is no longer any distinction
between persons and functionaries," all being confounded together,
marching pell-mell, executive council, city officials, judges
scattered about haphazard and, by virtue of equality, lost in the
crowd.  At each station, thanks to their insignia, the delegates form
the most conspicuous element.  On reaching the last one, that of the
Champ de Mars, they alone with the Convention, ascend the steps
leading to the alter of the country; on the highest platform stands
the eldest of all alongside the president of the Convention, also
standing; thus graded above each other, the seven thousand, who
envelope the seven hundred and fifty, form "the veritable Sacred
Mountain." Now, the president, on the highest platform, turns toward
the eighty-seven elders; he confides to the Ark containing the
Constitutional Act and the list of those who voted for it; they, on
their part, then advance and hand him their pikes, which he gathers
together into one bundle as an emblem of national unity and
indivisibility.  At this, shouts arise from every point of the immense
enclosure; salvoes of artillery follow again and again; "one would say
that heaven and earth answered each other" in honor "of the greatest
epoch of humanity." -- Certainly, the delegates are beside themselves;
their nerves, strained to the utmost, vibrates too powerfully; the
millennium discloses itself before their eyes.  Already, many among
them on the Place de la Bastille, had addressed the universe; others,
"seized with a prophetic spirit," promise eternity to the
Constitution.  They feel themselves "reborn again, along with the
human species;" they regard themselves as beings of a new world.
History is consummated in them; the future is in their hands; they
believe themselves gods on earth.  -- In this critical state, their
reason, like a pair of ill-balanced scales, yields to the slightest
touch; under the pressure of the manufacturers of enthusiasm, a sudden
reaction will carry them away.  They consider the Constitution as a
panacea, and they are going to consign it, like some dangerous drug,
to this coffer which they call an ark.  They have just proclaimed the
liberty of the people, and are going to perpetuate the dictatorship of
the Convention.




VI.   The Mountain.

Maneuvers of the "Mountain." -- The Jacobin Club on the eve of August
11th.  -- Session of the Convention on the 11th of August.  -- The
Delegates initiate Terror.  -- Popular consecration of the Jacobin
dictatorship.

This volteface has, of course, to appear spontaneous and the hand of
the titular rulers remain invisible: the Convention, as usual with
usurpers, is to simulate reserve and disinterestedness. -
Consequently, the following morning, August 11, on the opening of
the session, it simply declares that "its mission is fulfilled:"[41]
on the motion of Lacroix, a confederate of Danton's, it passes a law
that a new census of the population and of electors shall be made with
as little delay as possible, in order to convoke the primary
assemblies at once; it welcomes with joy the delegates who bring to it
the Constitutional Ark; the entire Assembly rises in the presence of
this sacred receptacle, and allows the delegates to exhort it and
instruct it concerning its duties.[42]  But in the evening, at the
Jacobin Club, Robespierre, after a long and vague discourse on public
dangers, conspiracies, and traitors, suddenly utters the decisive
words:

 "The most important of my reflections was about to escape me[43].  .
.  The proposition made this morning will only facilitate the
replacement of the purified members of this Convention by the envoys
of Pitt and Cobourg."

Dreadful words in the mouth of a man of principles! They are at once
understood by the leaders, great and small, also by the selected
fifteen hundred Jacobins then filling the hall.  "No! no! shouts the
entire club." The delegates are carried away:

 "I demand," exclaims one of them, "that the dissolution of the
Convention be postponed until the end of the war." -

 At last, the precious motion, so long desired and anticipated, is
made: the calumnies of the Girondins now fall the ground; it is
demonstrated that the Convention does not desire to perpetuate itself
and that it has no ambition; if it remains in power it is because it
is kept there; the delegates of the people compel it to stay.

And better still, they are going to mark out its course of action.  --
The next day, the 12th of August, with the zeal of new converts, they
spread themselves through the hall in such numbers that Assembly, no
longer able to carry on is deliberations, crowds toward the left and
yields the whole of the space on the right that they may occupy and
"purify"" it.[44]  All the combustible material in their minds,
accumulated during the past fortnight, takes fire and explodes; they
are more furious than the most ultra Jacobins; they repeat at the bar
of the house the extravagances of Rose Lacombe, and of the lowest
clubs; they even transcend the program drawn up by the "Mountain."
"The time for deliberation is past," exclaims their spokesman, "we
must act[45].  .  .  Let the people rouse themselves in a mass.  .  .
it alone can annihilate its enemies.  .  .  We demand that all
'suspects' be put under arrest; that they be dispatched to the
frontiers, followed by the terrible mass of sans-culottes.  There, in
the front ranks, they will be obliged to fight for that liberty which
they have outraged for the past four years, or be immolated on the
tyrants' cannon.  .  .  .  Women, children, old men and the infirm
shall be kept as hostages by the women and children of sans-culottes."
Danton seizes the opportunity.  With his usual lucidity he finds the
expression which describes the situation:

"The deputies of the primary assemblies," he says, "have just begun to
practice among us the initiative of terror."

He moreover reduces the absurd notions of the fanatics to a practical
measure: "A mobilization en masse, yes, but with order" by at once
calling out the first class of conscript, all men from eighteen to
twenty-five years of age; the arrest of all 'suspects', yes, but not
to lead them against the enemy; "they would be more dangerous than
useful in our armies; let us shut them up; they will be our hostages."
-- He also proposes employment for the delegates who are only in the
way in Paris and might be useful in the provinces.  Let us make of
them "various kinds of representatives charged with animating
citizens.  .  .  Let them, along with all good citizens and the
constituted authorities, take charge of the inventories of grain and
arms, and make requisitions for men, and let the Committee of Public
Safety direct this sublime movement.  .  .  .  All will swear that, on
returning to their homes, they will give this impulse their fellow
citizens." Universal applause; the delegates exclaim in one voice, "We
swear!" Everybody springs to his feet; the men in the tribunes wave
their hats and likewise should the same oath.  -- The scheme is
successful; a semblance of popular will has authorized the staff of
officials, the policy, the principles and the very name of Terror.  As
to the instruments for the operation they are all there ready to be
back into action.  The delegates, of whose demands and interference
the "Mountain" is still in dread, are sent back to their departmental
holes, where they shall serve as agents and missionaries.[46] There is
no further mention of putting the Constitution into operation; this
was simply a bait, a decoy, contrived for fishing in turbid waters:
the fishing ended, the Constitution is now placed in a conspicuous
place in the hall, in a small monument for which David furnished the
design.[47] -- The Convention, now, says Danton, "will rise to a sense
of its dignity, for it is now invested with the full power of the
nation." In other words, artifice completes what violence has begun.
Through the outrages committed in May and June, the Convention had
lost its legitimacy; through the maneuvers of July and August it
recovered the semblance of it.  The Montagnards still hold their slave
by his lash, but they have restored his prestige so as to make the
most of him to their own profit.



VII.

Effect of this maneuver.  -- Extent and Manifesto of the departmental
insurrection.  -- Its fundamental weakness.  -- The mass of the
population inert and distrustful.  -- The small number of Girondists.
-- Their lukewarm adherents.  -- Scruples of fugitive deputies and
insurgent administrators.  -- They form no central government.  --
They leave military authority in the hands of the Convention.  --
Fatal progress of their concessions.  -- Withdrawal of the departments
one by one.  -- Retraction of the compromised authorities.  -- Effect
of administrative habits.  -- Failings and illusions of the Moderates.
-- Opposite character of the Jacobins.

With the same blow, and amongst the same playacting, they have nearly
disarmed their adversaries.  -- On learning the events of May 31 and
June 2, a loud cry of indignation arose among republicans of the
cultivated class in this generation, who, educated by the
philosophers, sincerely believed in the rights of man.[48] Sixty-nine
department administrations had protested,[49] and, in almost all the
towns of the west, the south, the east and the center of France, at
Caen, Alençon, Evreux, Rennes, Brest, Lorient, Nantes and Limoges, at
Bordeaux, Toulouse, Montpellier, Nîmes and Marseilles, at Grenoble,
Lyons, Clermont, Lons-le-Saunier, Besançon, Mâcon and Dijon,[50] the
citizens, assembled in their sections, had provoked, or maintained by
cheering them on, the acts of their administrators.  Rulers and
citizens, all declared that, the Convention not being free, its
decrees after the 31st of May, no longer had the force of law; that
the troops of the departments should march on Paris to deliver that
city from its oppressors, and that their substitutes should be called
out and assemble at Bourges.  In many places words were converted into
acts.  Already before the end of May, Marseilles and Lyons had taken
up arms and checkmated their local Jacobins.  After the 2nd of June,
Normandy, Brittany, Gard, Jura, Toulouse and Bordeaux, had also raised
troops.  At Marseilles, Bordeaux and Caen representatives on mission,
arrested or under guard, were retained as hostages.[51] At Nantes, the
national Guard and popular magistrates who, a week before, had so
bravely repulsed the great Vendéan army, dared to more than this; they
limited the powers of the Convention and condemned all meddling:
according to them, the sending of representatives on mission was "an
usurpation, an attack on national sovereignty;" representatives had
been elected

 "to make and not to execute laws, to prepare a constitution and
regulate all public powers, and not to confound these together and
exercise them all at once; to protect and maintain intermediary powers
which the people have delegated, and not to encroach upon and
annihilate them."[52]

With still greater boldness, Montpellier enjoined all representatives
everywhere to meet at the headquarters of their respective
departments, and await the verdict of a national jury.  In short, in
accordance with the very democratic creed, "nothing was visible amid
the ruins of the Convention," mutilated and degraded, but interloping
"attorneys."  "The people's workmen" are summoned "to return to
obedience and do justice to the reproaches addressed to them by their
legitimate master;"[53] the nation canceled the pay of its clerks at
the capital, withdrew the mandate they had misused, and declared them
usurpers if they persisted in not yielding up their borrowed
sovereignty "to its inalienable sovereignty." -- To this stroke, which
strikes deep, the "Mountain" replies by a similar stroke; it also
renders homage to principles and falls back on the popular will.
Through the sudden manufacture of an ultra-democratic constitution,
through a convocation of the primary assemblies, and a ratification of
its work by the people in these assemblies, through the summoning of
delegates to Paris, through the assent of these converted, fascinated,
or constrained delegates, it exonerates and justifies itself, and thus
deprives the Girondins of the grievances to which they had given
currency, of the axioms they had displayed on their standards, and of
the popularity they thought they had acquired.[54] -- Henceforth, the
ground their opponents had built on sinks under their feet; the
materials collected by them disintegrate in their hands; their league
dissolves before it is completed, and the incurable weakness of the
party appears in full daylight.

Firstly, in the departments, as at Paris,[55] the party has no roots.
For the past three years all the sensible and orderly people, occupied
with their own affairs, who has no taste or interest in politics,
nine-tenths of the electors, abstain from voting and in this large
mass the Girondins have no adherents.  As they themselves admit,[56]
this class remains attached to the institutions of 1791, which they
have overthrown; if it has any esteem for them, it is as "extremely
honest madmen." Again, this esteem is mingled with aversion: it
reproaches them with the violent decrees they have passed in concert
with the "Mountain;" with persecutions, confiscations, every species
of injustice and cruelty; it always sees the King's blood on their
hands; they, too, are regicides, anti-Catholics, anti-Christians,
demolishers and levelers.[57] -- Undoubtedly they are less so than the
"Mountain;" hence, when the provincial insurrection breaks out, many
Feuillants and even Royalists follow them to the section assemblies
and join in their protests.  But the majority goes no further, and
soon falls back into is accustomed inertia.  It is not in harmony with
its leaders:[58]  its latent preferences are opposed to their avowed
program; it does not wholly trust them; it has only a half-way
affection for them; its recent sympathies are deadened by old
animosities: everywhere, instead of firmness there is only caprice.
All this affords no assurance of steadfast loyalty and practical
adhesion.  The Girondin deputies scattered through the provinces
relied upon each department arousing itself at their summons and
forming a republican Vendée against the "Mountain:" nowhere do they
find anything beyond mild approval and speculative hopes.

There remains to support them the élite of the republican party, the
scholars and lovers of literature, who are honest and sincere
thinkers, who, worked upon by the current dogmas, have accepted the
philosophical catechism literally and seriously.  Elected judges, or
department, district, and city administrators, commanders and officers
of the National Guard, presidents and secretaries of sections, they
occupy most of the places conferred by local authority, and hence
their almost unanimous protest seems at first to be the voice of
France.  In reality, it is only the despairing cry of a group of
staff-officers without an army.  Chosen under the electoral pressure
with which we are familiar, they possess rank, office and titles, but
no credit or influence; they are supported only by those whom they
really represent, that is to say, those who elected them, a tenth of
the population, and forming a sectarian minority.  Again, in this
minority there are a good many who are lukewarm; with most men the
distance is great between conviction and action; the interval is
filled up with acquired habits, indolence, fear and egoism.  One's
belief in the abstractions of the "Contrat-social" is of little
account; no one readily bestirs oneself for an abstract end.
Uncertainties beset one at the outset; the road one has to follow is
found to be perilous and obscure, and one hesitates and postpones; one
feels himself a home-body and is afraid of engaging too deeply and of
going too far.  Having expended one's breath in words one is less
willing to give one's money; another may open his purse but he may not
be disposed to give himself, which is as true of the Girondins as it
is of the Feuillants.

"At Marseilles,[59] at Bordeaux," says a deputy, "in nearly all the
principal towns, the proprietor, slow, indifferent and timid, could
not make up his mind to leave home for a moment; it was to mercenaries
that he entrusted his cause his arms."

Only the federates of Mayenne, Ile-et-Vilaine, and especially of
Finisterre, were "young men well brought up and well informed about
the cause they were going to support." In Normandy, the Central
Committee, unable to do better, has to recruit its soldiers, and
especially gunners, from the band of Carabots, former Jacobins, a lot
of ruffians ready for anything, pillagers and runaways at the first
canon-shot.  At Caen, Wimpffen, having ordered the eight battalions of
the National Guard to assemble in the court, demands volunteers and
finds that only seventeen step forth; on the following day a formal
requisition brings out only one hundred and thirty combatants; other
towns, except Vire, which furnishes about twenty, refuse their
contingent.  In short, a marching army cannot be formed, or, if it
does march, it halts at the first station, that of Evreux before
reaching Vernon, and that of Marseilles at the walls of Avignon.

On the other hand, by virtue of being sincere and logical, those who
have rebelled entertain scruples and themselves define the limits of
their insurrection.  The fugitive deputies at their head would believe
themselves guilty of usurpation had they, like the "Mountain" at
Paris, constituted themselves at Caen en sovereign assembly[60]:
according to them, their right and their duty is reduced to giving
testimony concerning the 31st of May and the 1st of June, and to
exhorting the people and to being eloquent.  They are not legally
qualified to take executive power; it is for the local magistrates,
the élus(elected) of the sections, and better still, the department committees
to command in the departments.  Lodged as they are in official
quarters, they are merely to print formal statements, write letters,
and, behaving properly, wait until the sovereign people, their
employer, reinstates them.  It has been outraged in their persons; it
must avenge itself for this outrage; since it approves of its
mandatories, it is bound to restore them to office; it being the
master of the house, it is bound to have its own way in the house.  --
As to the department committees, it is true that, in the heat of the
first excitement, they thought of forming a new Convention at
Bourges,[61] either through a muster of substitute deputies, or
through the convocation of a national commission of one hundred and
seventy members.  But time is wanting, also the means, to carry out
the plan; it remains suspended in the air like vain menace; at the end
of a fortnight it vanishes in smoke; the departments succeed in
federating only in scattered groups; they desist from the formation of
a central government, and thus, through this fact alone, condemn
themselves to succumb, one after the other, in detail, and each at
home.  -- What is worse, through conscientiousness and patriotism,
they prepare their own defeat: the refrain from calling upon the
armies and from stripping the frontiers; they do not contest the right
of the Convention to provide as it pleases for the national defense.
Lyons allows the passage of convoys of cannon-balls which are to be
subsequently used in cannonading its defenders[62].   The authorities
of Puy-de-Dome aid by sending to Vendée the battalion that they had
organized against the "Mountain." Bordeaux is to surrender Chateau-
Trompette, its munitions of war and supplies, to the representatives
on mission; and, without a word, with exemplary docility, both the
Bordeaux battalions which guard Blaye suffer themselves to be
dislodged by two Jacobin battalions.[63] -- Comprehending the
insurrection in this way, defeat is certain beforehand.

The insurgents are thus conscious of their false position; they have a
vague sort of feeling that, in recognizing the military authority of
the Convention, they admit its authority in full; insensibly they
glide down this slope, from concession to concession, until they reach
complete submission.  From the 16th of June, at Lyons,[64] "people
begin to feel that it ought not break with the Convention." Five weeks
later, the authorities of Lyons "solemnly recognize that the
Convention is the sole central rallying point of all French citizens
and republicans," and decree that "all acts emanating from it
concerning the general interests of the republic are to be
executed."[65] Consequently, at Lyons and in other departments, the
administrations convoke the primary assemblies as the Convention has
prescribed; consequently, the primary assemblies accept the
Constitution which it has proposed; consequently, the delegates of the
primary assemblies betake themselves to Paris according to its orders.
-- Henceforth, the Girondins' cause is lost; the discharge of a few
cannon at Vernon and Avignon disperse the only two columns of soldiery
that have set out on their march.  In each department, the Jacobins,
encouraged by the representatives on mission, raise their heads;
everywhere the local club enjoins the local government to submit,[66]
everywhere the local governments report the acts they pass, make
excuses and ask forgiveness.  Proportionately to the retraction of one
department, the rest, feeling themselves abandoned, are more disposed
to retract.  On the 9th of July forty-nine departments are enumerated
as having given in their adhesion.  Several of them declare that the
scales have dropped from their eyes, that they approve of the acts of
May 31 and June 2, and thus ensure their safety by manifesting their
zeal.  The administration of Calvados notifies the Breton fédérés that
"having accepted the Constitution it can no longer tolerate their
presence in Caen;" it sends them home, and secretly makes peace with
the "Mountain;" and only informs the deputies, who are its guests, of
this proceeding, three days afterwards, by postings on their door the
decree that declares them outlaws.

Disguised as soldiers, the latter depart along with the Breton
fédérés; on the way, they are able to ascertain the veritable
sentiments of this people whom they believe imbued with their rights
and capable of taking a political initiative.[67]  The pretended
citizens and republicans they have to do with are, in sum, the former
subjects of Louis XVI.  and the future subjects of Napoleon I., that
is to say, administrators and people, disciplined by habit and
instinctively subordinate, requiring a government just as sheep
require a shepherd and a watch-dog, accepting or submitting to
shepherd and dog, provided these look and act the part, even if the
shepherd be a butcher and the dog a wolf.  To avoid isolation, to
rejoin the most numerous herd as soon as possible, to always form
masses and bodies and thus follow the impulsion which comes from
above, and gather together scattered individuals, such is the instinct
of the flock.

In the battalion of federates, they begin by saying that, as the
Constitution is now accepted and the convention recognized, it is no
longer allowed to protect deputies whom it has declared outlaws: "that
would be creating a faction." Thereupon, the deputies withdraw from
the battalion, and, in a little squad by themselves, march along
separately.  As they are nineteen in number, resolute and well armed,
the authorities of the market-towns through which they pass make no
opposition by force; it would be offering battle, and that surpasses a
functionary's zeal; moreover, the population is either indifferent
toward them or sympathetic.  Nevertheless, efforts are made to stop
them, sometimes to surround them and take them by surprise; for, a
warrant of arrest is out against them, transmitted through the
hierarchical channel, and every local magistrate feels bound to do his
duty as gendarme.  Under this administrative network, the meshes of
which they encounter everywhere, the proscribed deputies can do naught
else but hide in caves or escape by sea.  -- On reaching Bordeaux,
they find other sheep getting ready for the slaughter-house.  Saige,
the mayor, preaches conciliation and patience: he declines the aid of
four or five thousand young men, three thousand grenadiers of the
National Guard, and two or three hundred volunteers who had formed
themselves into a club against the Jacobin club.  He persuades them to
disband; he sends a deputation to Paris to entreat the Convention to
overlook "a moment of error" and pardon their "brethren who had gone
astray." -- "They flattered themselves," says a deputy, an eye-
witness,[68] "that prompt submission would appease the resentment of
tyrants and that these would be, or pretend to be, generous enough to
spare a town that had distinguished itself more than any other during
the Revolution." Up to the last, they are to entertain the same
illusions and manifest the same docility.  When Tallien, with his
eighteen hundred peasants and brigands, enters Bordeaux, twelve
thousand National Guards, equipped, armed and in uniform, receive him
wearing oak-leaf crowns; they listen in silence to "his astounding and
outrageous discourse;" they suffer him to tear off their crowns,
cockades and epaulettes; the battalions allow themselves to be
disbanded on the spot; on returning to their quarters they listen with
downcast eyes to the proclamation which "orders all inhabitants
without distinction to bring their arms within thirty-six hours, under
the penalty of death, to the glacis of the Chateau-Trompette; before
the time elapses thirty thousand guns, swords, pistols and even
pocket-knives are given up."

Here, as at Paris, on the 20th of June, 10th of August, 2nd of
September, 3rd of May and 2nd of June, as at every critical moment of
the Revolution in Paris and the provinces, habits of subordination and
of amiability, stamped on a people by a provident monarchy and a time-
honored civilization, have blunted in man the foresight of danger, his
aggressive instinct, his independence and the faculty of depending
upon himself only, the willingness to help one another and of saving
himself.  Inevitably, when anarchy brings a nation back to the state
of nature, the tame animals will be eaten by the savage ones, -- these
are now let loose and immediately they show their true nature.



VIII.  The Reasons for the Terror.

The last local resistance.  -- Political orthodoxy of the insurgent
towns.  -- They stipulate but one condition.  -- Reasons of State for
granting this.  -- Party arguments against it.

If the men of the "Mountain" had been statesmen, or even sensible men,
they would have shown themselves humane, if not for the sake of
humanity, at least through calculation; for in this France, so little
republican, all the republican strength is not too great for the
founding of the Republic, while, through their principles, their
culture, their social position and their number, the Girondins form
the élite and the force, the flower and the sap of the party.  -- The
death-cry of the "Mountain" against the insurgents of Lozére[69] and
Vendée can be understood: they had raised the king's white flag; they
accepted leaders and instructions from Coblentz and London.  But
neither Bordeaux, Marseilles nor Lyons are royalist, or in alliance
with the foreigner.

 "We, rebels!" write the Lyonnese;[70] "Why we see no other than the
tri-color flag waving; the white cockade, the symbol of rebellion, has
never been raised within our walls.  We, royalists! Why, shouts of
'Long live the Republic' are heard on all sides, and, spontaneously
(in the session of July 2nd) we have all sworn to fall upon whoever
should propose a king.  .  .  .  Your representatives tell you that we
are anti-revolutionaries, we who have accepted the Constitution.  They
tell you that we protect émigrés when we have offered to surrender all
those that you might indicate.  They tell you that our streets are
filled with refractory priests, when we have not even opened the doors
of Pierre-en-Cize (prison) to the thirty-two priests confined there by
the old municipality, without indictment, without any charge whatever
against them, solely because they were priests."

Thus, at Lyons, the pretended aristocrats were, then, not only
republicans but democrats and radicals, loyal to the established
régime, and submissive to the worst of the revolutionary laws, while
the same state of things prevailed at Bordeaux, at Marseilles and even
at Toulon.[71] And furthermore, they accepted the outrages of May 31
and June 2;[72] they stopped contesting the usurpations of Paris; they
no longer insisted on the return of the excluded deputies.  On the 2nd
of August at Bordeaux, and the 30th of July at Lyons, the Committee-
Extraordinary of Public Safety resigned; there no longer existed any
rival assembly opposed to the Convention.  After the 24th of July,[73]
Lyons solemnly recognized the supreme and central authority, reserving
nothing but its municipal franchises.  - And better still, in striking
testimony of political orthodoxy, the Council-General of the
department prescribed a civic festival for the 10th of August
analogous to that of Paris.  The Lyonnese, already blockaded, indulged
in no hostile manifestation; on the 7th of August they marched out of
their advanced positions to fraternize with the first body of troops
sent against them.[74]  They conceded everything, save on one point,
which they could not yield without destruction, namely, the assurance
that they should not be given up defenseless to the arbitrary judgment
of their local tyrants, to the spoliation, proscriptions and revenge
of the Jacobin rabble.  In sum, at Marseilles and Bordeaux, especially
at Lyons and Toulon, the sections had revolted only on that account;
acting promptly and spontaneously, the people had thrust aside the
knife which a few ruffians aimed at their throats; they had not been,
and were not now, willing to be "Septemberised," that was their sole
concern.  Provided they were not handed over to the butchers bound
hand and foot, they would open their gates.  On these minimum terms
the "Mountain" could terminate the civil war before the end of July.
It had only to follow the example of Robert Lindet who, at Evreux the
home of Buzot, at Caen the home of Charlotte Corday and the central
seat of the fugitive Girondins, established permanent obedience
through the moderation he had shown and the promises he had kept.[75]
The measures that had pacified the most compromised province would
have brought back the others, and through this policy, Paris, without
striking a blow, would have secured the three largest cities in
France, the capital of the South-west, that of the South, and the
capital of the Center.

On the contrary, should Paris persist in imposing on them the
domination of its local Jacobins there was a risk of their being
thrown into the arms of the enemy.  Rather than fall back into the
hands of the bandits who had ransomed and decimated them, Toulon,
starved out, was about to receive the English within its walls and
surrender to them the great arsenal of the South.  Not less famished,
Bordeaux might be tempted to demand aid from another English fleet; a
few marches would brings the Piedmontese army to Lyons; France would
then b cut in two, while the plan of stirring up the South against the
North was proposed to the allies by the most clear-sighted of their
councilors.[76] Had this plan been carried out it is probably that the
country would have been lost.  -- In any event, there was danger in
driving the insurgents to despair: for, between the unbridled
dictatorship of their victorious assassins and the musketry of the
besieging army, there could be no hesitation by men of any feeling; it
was better to be beaten on the ramparts than allow themselves to be
bound for the guillotine; brought to a stand under the scaffold, their
sole resource was to depend on themselves to the last.  -- Thus,
through its unreasonableness, the "Mountain" condemns itself to a
number of sieges or blockades which lasted several months,[77] to
leaving Var and Savoy unprotected, to exhausting the arsenals, to
employing against Frenchmen[78] troops and munitions needed against
foreigners, and all this at the moment the foreigner was taking
Valenciennes[79] and Mayence, when thirty thousand royalist were
organizing in Lozére, when the great Vendean army was laying siege to
Nantes, when each new outbreak of fighting was threatening to connect
the flaming frontier with the conflagration in the Catholic
countries.[80] -- With a jet of cold water aptly directed, the
"Mountain" could extinguish the fires it had kindled in the great
republican towns; otherwise, nothing remained but to let them increase
at the risk of consuming the whole country, with no other hope than
that they might at last die out under a mass of ruins, and with no
other object but to rule over captives and the dead.

But this is precisely the Jacobin aim; for, he is not satisfied with
less than absolute submission ; he must rule at any cost, just as he
pleases, by fair means or foul, no matter over what ruins.  A despot
by instinct and installation, his dogma has consecrated him King ; he
is King by natural and divine right, in the name of eternal verity,
the same as Philip II., enthroned by his religious system and blessed
by his Holy Office.  Hence he can abandon no jot or title of his
authority without a sacrifice of principle, nor treat with rebels,
unless they surrender at discretion; simply for having risen against
legitimate authority, they are traitors and villains.  And who are
greater rascals the renegades who, after three years of patient
effort, just as the sect finally reaches its goal, oppose its
accession to power![81] At Nîmes, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Toulon, and
Lyons, not only have they interfered with or arrested the blow which
Paris struck, but they have put down the aggressors, closed the club,
disarmed the fanatical and imprisoned the leading Maratists; and worse
still, at Lyons and at Toulon, five or six massacreurs, or promoters
of massacre, Châlier and Riard, Jassaud, Sylvestre and Lemaille,
brought before the courts, have been condemned and executed after a
trial in which all the forms were strictly adhered to.  -- That is the
inexpiable crime; for, in this trial, the "Mountain" is involved; the
principles of Sylvestre and Châlier are its principles; what is
accomplished in Paris, they have attempted in the provinces; if they
are guilty, it is also guilty; it cannot tolerate their punishment
without assenting to its own punishment.  Accordingly,

* it must proclaim them heroes and martyrs,

* it must canonize their memory,[82]

* it must avenge their tortures,

* it must resume and complete their assaults,

* it must restore their accomplices to their places,

* it must render them omnipotent,

* it must force each rebel city to accept the rule of its rabble and
villains.

It matters little whether the Jacobins be a minority, whether at
Bordeaux, they have but four out of twenty-eight sections on their
side, at Marseilles five out of thirty-two, whether at Lyons they can
count up only fifteen hundred devoted adherents.[83]  Suffrages are
not reckoned, but weighed, for legality is founded, not on numbers,
but on patriotism, the sovereign people being composed wholly of sans-
culottes.  So much the worse for towns where the anti-revolutionary
majority is so great; they are only more dangerous; under the
republican demonstrations is concealed the hostility of old parties
and of the "suspect" classes, the Moderates, the Feuillants and
Royalists, merchants, men of the legal profession, property-owners and
muscadins.[84] These towns are nests of reptiles and must be crushed
out.



IX.

Destruction of Rebel Cities.  -- Bordeaux.  -- Marseilles.  -- Lyons.-
- Toulon.

Consequently, obedient or disobedient, they are crushed out.  They are
declared traitors to the country, not merely the members of the
departmental committees, but, at Bordeaux, all who have "aided or
abetted the Committee of Public Safety;" at Lyons, all administrators,
functionaries, military or civil officers who "convoked or tolerated
the Rhône-et-Loire congress," and furthermore, "every individual whose
son, clerk, servant, or even day-laborer, may have borne arms or
contributed the means of resistance," that is to say, the entire
National Guard who took up arms, and nearly all the population which
gave its money or voted in the sections.[85] -- By virtue of this
decree, all are "outlaws," or, in other words subject to the
guillotine just on the establishment of their identity, and their
property confiscated.  Consequently, at Bordeaux, where not a gun had
been fired, the mayor Saige, and principal author of the submission,
is at once led to the scaffold without any form of trial,[86] while
eight hundred and eighty-one others succeed him amidst the solemn
silence of a dismayed population.[87]  Two hundred prominent merchants
are arrested in one night; more than fifteen hundred persons are
imprisoned; all who are well off are ransomed, even those against who
no political charge could be made; nine millions of fines are levied
against "rich egoists." One of these,[88] accused of "indifference and
moderatism," pays twenty thousand francs "not to be harnessed to the
car of the Revolution;" another "convicted of having shown contempt
for his section and for the poor by giving thirty livres per months,"
is taxed at one million two hundred thousand livres, while the new
authorities, a crooked mayor and twelve knaves composing the
Revolutionary Committee, traffic in lives and property.89 At
Marseilles, says Danton,[90] the object is "to give the commercial
aristocracy an important lesson;" we must "show ourselves as terrible
to traders as to nobles and priests;" consequently, twelve thousand of
them are proscribed and their possessions sold.[91] From the first day
the guillotine works as fast as possible; nevertheless, it does not
work fast enough for Representative Fréron who finds the means for
making it work faster.

 "The military commission we have established in place of the
revolutionary tribunal," he writes, "works frightfully fast against
the conspirators.  .  .  .  They fall like hail under the sword of the
law.  Fourteen have already paid for their infamous treachery with
their heads.  To-morrow, sixteen more are to be guillotined, all
chiefs of the legion, notaries, sectionists, members of the popular
tribunal; to-morrow, also, three merchants will dance the carmagnole,
and they are the ones we are after."[92]

Men and things, all must perish; he wishes to demolish the city and
proposes to fill up the harbor.  Restrained with great difficulty,
Fréron contents himself with a destruction of "the haunts" of the
aristocracy, two churches, the concert-hall, the houses around it, and
twenty-three buildings in which the rebel sections had held their
meetings.

At Lyons, to increase the booty, the representatives had taken pains
to encourage the manufacturers and merchants with vague promises;
these opened their shops and brought their valuable goods, books and
papers out of their hiding-places.  No time is lost in seizing the
plunder; "a list of all property belonging to the rich and to anti-
revolutionaries" is drawn up, which is "confiscated for the benefit of
the patriots of the city;" in addition to this a tax of six millions
is imposed, payable in eight days, by those whom the confiscation may
have still spared;[93] it is proclaimed, according to principle, that
the surplus of each individual belongs by right to the sans-culottes,
and whatever may have been retained beyond the strictly necessary, is
a robbery by the individual to the detriment of the nation.[94]  In
conformity with this rule there is a general rounding up, prolonged
for ten months, which places the fortunes of a city of one hundred and
twenty thousand souls in the hands of its scoundrels.  Thirty-two
revolutionary committees "whose members are thick as thieves select
thousands of guards devoted to them."[95]  In confiscated dwellings
and warehouses, they affix seals without an inventory; they drive out
women and children "so that there shall be no witnesses;" they keep
the keys; they enter and steal when they please, or install themselves
for a revel with prostitutes.  -- Meanwhile, the guillotine is kept
going, and people are fired at and shot down with grape-shot.  The
revolutionary committee officially avow one thousand six hundred and
eighty-two acts of murder committed in five months,[96] while a
confederate of Robespierre's privately declare that there were six
thousand.[97]

Blacksmiths are condemned to death for having shod the Lyonnese
cavalry, firemen for having extinguished fires kindled by republican
bombshells, a widow for having paid a war-tax during the siege, market
women for "having shown disrespect to patriots." It is an organized
"Septembrisade" made legal and lasting; its authors are so well aware
of the fact as to use the word itself in their public
correspondence.[98] -- At Toulon it is worse, people are slaughtered
in heaps, almost haphazard.  Notwithstanding that the inhabitants the
most compromised, to the number of four thousand, take refuge on board
English vessels, the whole city, say the representatives, is guilty.
Four hundred workmen in the navy-yard having marched out to meet
Fréron, he reminds them that they kept on working during the English
occupation of the town, and he has them put to death on the spot.  An
order is issued to all "good citizens to assemble in the Champ de Mars
on penalty of death." They come there to the number of three thousand;
Fréron, on horseback, surrounded by cannon and troops, arrives with
about a hundred Maratists, the former accomplices of Lemaille,
Sylvestre, and other well-known assassins, who form a body of local
auxiliaries and counselors; he tells them to select out of the crowd
at pleasure according to their grudge, fancy, or caprice; all who are
designated are ranged along a wall and shot.  The next morning, and on
the following days, the operation is renewed: Fréron writes on the
16th of Nivose that "eight hundred Toulonese have already been shot."
.  .  .  "A volley of musketry," says he, in another letter, and after
that, volley after volley, until "the traitors are all gone." Then,
for three months after this, the guillotine dispatches eighteen
hundred persons; eleven young women have to mount the scaffold
together, in honor of a republican festival; an old woman of ninety-
four is borne to it in an armchair.  The population, initially of
twenty-eight thousand people, is reduced to six or seven thousand
only.

All this is not enough; the two cities that dared maintain a siege
must disappear from the French soil.  The Convention decrees that "the
city of Lyons shall be destroyed: every house occupied by a rich man
shall be demolished; only the dwellings of the poor shall remain, with
edifices specially devoted to industry, and monuments consecrated to
humanity and public education."[99] The same at Toulon: "the houses
within the town shall be demolished; only the buildings that are
essential for army and navy purposes, for stores and munitions, shall
be preserved."[100]  Consequently, a requisition is made in Var and
the neighboring departments for twelve thousand masons to level Toulon
to the ground.  -- At Lyons, fourteen thousand laborers pull down the
Chateau Pierre-Encize; also the superb houses on Place Bellecour,
those of the Quai St.-Clair, those of the Rues de Flandre and de
Bourgneuf, and many others; the cost of all this amounts to four
hundred thousand livres per decade; in six months the Republic expends
fifteen millions in destroying property valued at three or four
hundred millions, all belonging to the Republic.[101]  Since the
Mongols of the fifth and thirteenth centuries, no such vast and
irrational waste had been seen -- such frenzy against the most
profitable fruits of industry and human civilization.  -- Again, one
can understand how the Mongols, who were nomads, desired to convert
the soil into one vast steppe.  But, to demolish a town whose arsenal
and harbor is maintained by it, to destroy the leaders of
manufacturing interests and their dwellings in a city where its
workmen and factories are preserved, to keep up a fountain and stop
the stream which flows from it, or the stream without the fountain, is
so absurd that the idea could only enter the head of a Jacobin.  His
imagination has run so wild and his prevision become so limited that
he is no longer aware of contradictions; the ferocious stupidity of
the barbarian and the fixed idea of the inquisition meet on common
ground; the earth is not big enough for any but himself and the
orthodox of his species.  Employing absurd, inflated and sinister
terms he decrees the extermination of heretics: not only shall their
monuments, dwellings and persons be destroyed, but every vestige of
them shall be eradicated and their names lost to the memory of
man.[102]

 "The name of Toulon shall be abolished; that commune shall henceforth
bear the name of Port-la-Montagne." - "The name of Lyons shall be
stricken off the list of towns belonging to the Republic; the
remaining collection of houses shall henceforth bear the name of
Ville-Affranchie.  A column shall be erected on the ruins of Lyons
bearing this inscription: 'Lyons made war on Liberty! Lyons is no
more!'"



X.

Destruction of the Girondin party.  -- Proscription of the Deputies of
the "Right".  -- Imprisonment of the 73.  -- Execution of the 21.  --
Execution, suicide, or flight of the rest.

In all this there is no intention to spare in Paris the chiefs of the
insurrection or of the party, either deputies or ministers; on the
contrary, the object is to complete the subjection of the Convention,
to stifle the murmurs of the "Right," to impose silence on Ducos,
Boyer-Fonfrède, Vernier, and Couhey, who still speak and protest.[103]
Hence the decrees of arrest or death, launched weekly from the top of
the "Mountain," fall on the majority like guns fired into a crowd.
Decrees of accusation follow: on the 15th of June, against Duchâtel,
on the 17th against Barbaroux, on the 23rd against Brissot, on the 8th
of July against Devérité and Condorcet, on the 14th against Lauze-
Deperret and Fauchet, on the 30th against Duprat Jr., Valée and
Mainvielle, on the 2nd of August against Rouyer, Brunel and Carra;
Carra, Lauze-Deperret and Fauchet, present during the session, are
seized on the spot, which is plain physical warning: none is more
effective to check the unruly.  -- Decrees are passed on the 18th of
July accusing Coustard, on the 28th of July against Gensonné, La
Source, Vergniaud, Mollevaut, Gardien, Grangeneuve, Fauchet, Boilleau,
Valazé, Cussy, Meillan; each being aware that the tribunal before
which he must appear is the waiting room to the guillotine.  --
Decrees of condemnation are passed on the 12th of July against
Birotteau, the 28 of July against Buzot, Barbaroux, Gorsas,
Lanjuniais, Salles, Louvet, Bergoeing, Pétion, Guadet, Chasset,
Chambon, Lidon, Valady, Defermon, Kervelégen, Larivière, Rabaut-Saint-
Étienne, and Lesage; pronounced outlaws and traitors, they are to be
led to the scaffold without trial as soon as they can be got hold of.
-- Finally, on the 3rd of October, a great haul of the net in the
Assembly itself sweeps off the benches all the deputies that still
seem capable of any independence: the first thing is to close the
doors of the hall, which is done by Amar, reporter of the Committee of
General Security;[104] then, after a declamatory and calumnious
speech, which lasts two hours, he reads off names on two lists of
proscriptions: forty-five deputies, more or less prominent among the
Girondins, are to be at once summoned before the revolutionary
tribunal; seventy-three others, who have signed secret protests
against the 31st of May and 2nd of June, are to be put in jail.  No
arguing! the majority dares not even express an opinion.  Some of the
proscribed attempt to exculpate themselves, but they are not allowed
to be heard; none but the Montagnards have the floor, and they do no
more than add to the lists, each according to personal enmity;
Levasseur has Vigée put down, and Duroi adds the name of Richon.  One
their names being called, all the poor creatures who happen to be
inscribed, quietly advance and "huddle together within the bar of the
house, like lambs destined to slaughter," and here they are separated
into two flocks; on the one hand the seventy-three, and on the other,
the ten or twelve who, with the Girondins already kept under lock and
key, are to furnish the sacramental and popular number, the twenty-two
traitors, whose punishment is a requirement of the Jacobin
imagination;[105] on the left, the batch for the prison; on the right,
the batch for the guillotine.

To those who might be tempted to imitate them or defend them this is a
sufficient lesson.  - Subject to the boos, hisses and insults from the
hags lining the streets, the seventy-three[106] are conducted to the
prisoners' room in the town hall.  This, already full, is where they
pass the night standing on benches, scarcely able to breathe.  The
next day they are crammed into the prison for assassins and robbers,
"la Force," on the sixth story, under the roof; in this narrow garret
their beds touch each other, while two of the deputies are obliged to
sleep on the floor for lack of room.  Under the skylights, which serve
for windows, and at the foot of the staircase are two pig-pens; at the
end of the apartment are the privies, and in one corner a night-tub,
which completes the poisoning of the atmosphere already vitiated by
this crowded mass of human beings.  The beds consist of sacks of straw
swarming with vermin; they are compelled to endure the
discipline,[107] rations and mess of convicts.  And they are lucky to
escape at this rate: for Amar takes advantage of their silent
deportment to tax them with conspiracy; other Montagnards likewise
want to arraign them at the revolutionary Tribunal: at all events, it
is agreed that the Committee of General Security shall examine their
records and maintain the right of designating new culprits amongst
them.  For ten months they thus remain under the knife, in daily
expectation of joining the twenty-two on the Place de la Révolution.
-- With respect to the latter, the object is not to try them but to
kill them, and the semblance of a trial is simply judicial
assassination; the bill of indictment against them consists of club
gossip; they are accused of having desired the restoration of the
monarchy, of being in correspondence with Pitt and Coburg;[108] of
having excited Vendée to insurrection.  The betrayal of Dumouriez is
imputed to them, also the murder of Lepelletier, and the assassination
of Marat; while pretended witnesses, selected from amongst their
personal enemies, come and repeat, like a theme agreed upon, the same
ill-contrived fable: nothing but vague allegations and manifest
falsehoods, not one definite fact, not once convincing document; the
lack of proof is such that the trial has to be stopped as soon as
possible.  "You brave b------ forming the court," writes Hébert,
"don't trifle away your time.  Why so much ceremony in shortening the
days of wretches whom the people have already condemned?" Care is
especially taken not to let them have a chance to speak.  The
eloquence of Vergniaud and logic of Guadet might turn the tables at
the last moment.  Consequently, a prompt decree authorizes the
tribunal to stop proceedings as soon as the jury becomes sufficiently
enlightened, which is the case after the seventh session of the court,
the record of death suddenly greeting the accused, who are not allowed
to defend themselves.  One of them, Valazé, stabs himself in open
court, and the next day the national head-chopper strikes off the
remaining twenty heads in thirty-eight minutes.  - Still more
expeditious are the proceedings against the accused who avoid a trial.
Gorsas, seized in Paris on the 8th of October, is guillotined the same
day.  Birotteau, seized at Bordeaux, on the 24th of October, mounts
the scaffold within twenty-four hours.  The others, tracked like
wolves, wandering in disguise from one hiding-place to another, and
most of them arrested in turn, have only choice of several kinds of
death.  Cambon is killed in defending himself.  Lidon, after having
defended himself, blows out his brains, Condorcet takes poison in the
guard-room of Bourg-la-Reine.  Roland kills himself with his sword on
the highway.  Clavière stabs himself in prison.  Rébecqui is found
drowned in the harbor of Marseilles, and Pétion and Buzon half eaten
by wolves on a moor of Saint-Emilion.  Valady is executed at
Périgueux, Dechézeau at Rochefort, Grangeneuve, Guadet, Salle and
Barbaroux at Bordeaux, Coustard, Cussy, Rabout-Saint-Étienne, Bernard,
Masuyer, and Lebrun at Paris.  Even those who resigned in January,
1793, Kersaint and Manuel, atone with their lives for the crime of
having sided with the "Right" and, of course, Madame Roland, who is
taken for the leader of the party, is one of the first to be
guillotined.[109]  - Of the one-hundred and eighty Girondins who led
the Convention, one hundred and forty have perished or are in prison,
or fled under sentence of death.  After such a curtailment and such an
example the remaining deputies cannot be otherwise than docile;[110]
neither in the central nor in the local government will the "Mountain"
encounter resistance; its despotism is practically established, and
all that remains is to proclaim this in legal form.



XI.

Institutions of the Revolutionary Government.  - Its principle,
objects, proceedings, tools and structure.  - The Committee of Public
Safety.  - Subordination of the Convention and ministry.  - The use of
the Committee of General Security and the Revolutionary Tribunal.  -
Administrative centralization.  - Representatives on Mission, National
Agents and Revolutionary Committees.  - Law of Lése-majesty.  -
Restoration and Aggravation of the institutions of the old monarchy.

After the 2nd of August, on motion of Bazire, the Convention decrees
"that France is in revolution until its independence is recognized."
which means[111] that the period of hypocritical phrases has come to
an end, that the Constitution was merely a signboard for a fair, and
that the charlatans who had made use of it no longer need it, that it
is to be put away in the store containing other advertising material,
that individual, local and parliamentary liberties are abolished, that
the government is arbitrary and absolute, that no institution, law,
dogma, or precedent affords any guarantee for it against the rights of
the people, that property and lives are wholly at its mercy, that
there are no longer any rights of man.  - Six weeks later, when,
through the protest of the forty-five and the arrest of the seventy-
three, obedience to the Convention is assured, all this is boldly and
officially announced in the tribune.  "Under the present circumstances
of the Republic," says St.  Just, "the Constitution cannot be
implemented as this would enable attacks on liberty to take place
because it would lack the violent measures necessary to repress
these." We are no longer to govern "according to maxims of natural
peace and justice; these maxims are only valid among the friends of
liberty;" but they are not applicable between patriots and the
malevolent.  The latter are "outside our sovereignty," are lawless,
excluded from the social pact, slaves in rebellion, to be punished or
imprisoned, and, amongst the malevolent must be placed "the
indifferent[112]".  -  "You are to punish whoever is passive in the
Republic and does nothing for it;" for his passivity is treason and
ranks him among other public enemies.  Now, between the people and its
enemies, there is nothing in common but the sword; steel must control
those who cannot be ruled "by justice"; the monarchical and neutral
majority must be repressed (comprimé);

"The Republic will be founded only when the sans-culottes,[113] the
sole representatives of the nation, the only citizens, "shall rule by
right of conquest."[114]

The meaning of this is more than clear.  The régime of which St.  Just
presents the plan, is that by which every oligarchy of invaders
installs and maintains itself over a subjugated nation.  Through this
régime, in Greece, ten thousand Spartans, after the Dorian invasion,
mastered three hundred thousand helots and périocques; through this
régime, in England, sixty thousand Normans, after the battle of
Hastings, mastered two million Saxons; through this régime in Ireland,
since the battle of the Boyne, two hundred thousand English
Protestants have mastered a million of Catholic Irish; through this
régime, the three hundred thousand Jacobins of France will master the
seven or eight millions of Girondins, Feuillants, Royalists or
Indifferents.

This system of government is a very simple one and consist in
maintaining the subject population in a state of extreme helplessness
and of extreme terror.  To this end, it is disarmed;[115] it is kept
under surveillance ; all action in common is prohibited ; its eyes
should always be directed to the up-lifted ax and to the prison doors
always open ; it is ruined and decimated.  - For the past six months
all these rigors are decreed and applied, -- disarmament of
"suspects," taxes on the rich, the maximum against traders,
requisitions on land-owners, wholesale arrests, rapid executions of
sentences, arbitrary penalties of death, and publicized, multiplied
tortures.  For the past six months, all sorts of executive instruments
are set up and put into operation: The Committee of Public Safety, the
Committee of General Security, ambulating proconsuls with full power,
local committees authorized to tax and imprison at will, a
revolutionary army, a revolutionary tribunal.  But, for lack of
internal harmony and of central impulsion, the machine only half
works, the power not being sufficient and its action not sufficiently
sweeping and universal.

  "You are too remote from the conspiracies against you," says St.
Just;[116] "it is essential that the sword of the law should
everywhere be rapidly brandished and your arm be everywhere present to
arrest crime.....  The ministers confess that, beyond their first and
second subordinates, they find nothing but inertia and indifference."
--  "A similar apathy is found in all the government agents," adds
Billaud-Varennes;[117] "the secondary authorities which are the strong
points of the Revolution serve only to impede it." Decrees,
transmitted through administrative channels, arrive slowly and are
indolently applied.  "You are missing that co-active force which is
the principle of being, of action, of execution.  .  .  .  Every good
government should possess a center of willpower and the levers
connected with it.  .  .  .  Every government activity should
exclusively originate from the central source." -

  "In ordinary governments," says Couthon, finally,[118] "the right of
electing belongs to the people; you cannot take it away from them.  In
extraordinary governments all impulsion must come from the center; it
is from the convention that elections must issue.  .  .  .  You would
injure the people by confiding the election of officials to them,
because you would expose them to electing men that would betray them."

-- The result is that the constitutional maxims of 1789 give way to
radically opposed maxims ; instead of subjecting the government to the
people, the people is made subject to the government.  The hierarchy
of the ancient régime is re-established under revolutionary terms, and
henceforth all powers, much more formidable than those of the ancient
régime, cease to be delegated from the depths to the summit and will
henceforth instead be delegated from the summit to the bottom.

At the summit, a committee of twelve members, similar to the former
royal council, exercises collective royalty ; nominally, authority is
divided amongst the twelve; it is, in practice, concentrated in a few
hands.  Several members occupy only a subaltern position, and amongst
these, Barère, who, official secretary and mouthpiece, is always ready
to make a speech or draft an editorial; others, with special
functions, Jean Bon St.  André, Lindet, and above all, Prieur de la
Côte d'Or and Carnot, confine themselves each to his particular
department, navy, war, supplies, with blank signatures, for which they
give in return their signatures to the political leaders; the latter,
called "the statesmen," Robespierre, Couthon, Saint-Just, Collot
d'Herbois, Billaud-Varennes, are the real rulers providing overall
direction.  It is true that their mandate has to be renewed monthly;
but this is a certainty, for, in the present state of the Convention,
its vote, required beforehand, becomes an almost vain formality.  More
submissive than the parliament of Louis XIV., the Convention adopts,
without discussion, the decrees which the Committee of Public Safety
present to it ready made.  It is no more than a registry-office, and
scarcely that, for it has relinquished its right of appointing its own
committees, that office being assigned to the Committee of Public
Safety; it votes as a whole all lists of names which the Committee
send in.[119]  Naturally, none but the creatures of the latter and the
faithful are inscribed; thus, the whole legislative and parliamentary
power belongs to it.  -- As to executive and administrative power, the
ministers have become mere clerks of the Committee of Public Safety;
"they come every day at specified hours to receive its orders and
acts;[120]  "they submit to it "the list with explanations, of all the
agents" sent into the departments and abroad ; they refer to it every
minute detail; they are its scribes, merely its puppets, so
insignificant that they finally lose their title, and for the
"Commission on External Relations" a former school-master is taken, an
inept clubbist, bar-fly and the pillar of the billiard-room, scarcely
able to read the documents brought to him to sign in the café where he
passes his days.[121] -- Thus is the second power in the State
converted by the Committee into a squad of domestics, while the
foremost one is converted into an audience of claqueurs.

To make them do their duty, it has two hands.  -- One, the right,
which seizes people unawares by the collar, is the Committee of
General Security, composed of twelve extreme Montagnards, such as
Panis, Vadier, Le Bas, Geoffroy, David, Amar, La Vicomterie, Lebon and
Ruhl, all nominated, that is to say, appointed by it, being its
confederates and subalterns.  They are its lieutenants of police, and
once a week they come and take part in its labors, as formerly the
Sartines, and the Lenoirs assisted the Comptroller-general.  A man who
this secret committee deems a "suspect," is suddenly seized, no matter
who, whether representative, minister, or general, and finds himself
the next morning behind the bars in one of the ten new Bastilles.  --
There, the other hand seizes him by the throat; this is the
revolutionary tribunal, an exceptional court like the extraordinary
commissions of the ancient régime, only far more terrible.  Aided by
its police gang, the Committee of Public Safety itself selects the
sixteen judges and sixty jurymen[122] from among the most servile, the
most furious, or the most brutal of the fanatics:[123] Fouquier-
Tinville, Hermann, Dumas, Payan, Coffinhal, Fleuriot-Lescot, and,
lower down on the scale, apostate priests, renegade nobles,
disappointed artists, infatuated studio-apprentices, journeymen
scarcely able to write their names, shoemakers, joiners, carpenters,
tailors, barbers, former lackeys, an idiot like Ganney, a deaf man
like Leroy-Dix-Août; their names and professions indicate all that is
necessary to be told: these men are licensed and paid murderers.  The
Jurymen themselves are allowed eighteen francs a day, so that they may
attend to their business more leisurely.  This business consists in
condemning without proof, without any pleadings, and scarcely any
examination, in a hurry, in batches, whoever the Committee of Public
Safety might send to them, even the most confirmed Montagnards:
Danton, who contrived the tribunal, will soon discover this.  - it is
through these two government institutions that the Committee of Public
Safety keeps every head under the cleaver and each head, to avoid
being struck off, bows down,[124] in the provinces as well as in
Paris.

This has happened when the existing local hierarchy was replaced by
new authorities making the omnipotent will of the Committee present
everywhere.  Directly or indirectly, "for all government measures or
measures of public safety, all that relates to persons and the general
and internal police, all constituted bodies and all public
functionaries, are placed under its inspection."[125]  You may imagine
how the risk of being guillotined weighed upon them.

To suppress in advance any tendency to administrative inertia, it has
had withdrawn from the too powerful, too much respected, department
governments, "too inclined to federalism," their departmental
dominance and their "political influence."[126]  It reduces these to
the levying of taxes and the supervision of roads and canals; it
purges them out through its agents; it even purges out the governments
of municipalities and districts.  To suppress beforehand all
probability of popular opposition, it has had the sessions of the
sections reduced to two per week; it installs in these sections, for
about forty sous a day, a majority of sans-culottes ; it orders the
suspension "until further directives" of all municipal elections.[127]

Finally, to have full control on the spot, it appoints its own men,
first, the commissioners and the representatives on missions, a sort
of temporary corps of directors sent into each department with
unlimited powers;[128] next, a body of national agents, a sort of
permanent body of sub-delegates, through whom in each district and
municipality it replaces the procureurs-syndics.[129]  To this army of
functionaries is added in each town, bourg or large village, a
revolutionary committee, paid three francs a day per member, charged
with the application of its decrees, and required to make reports
thereon.  Never before was such a vast and closely woven network cast
from above to envelope and keep captive twenty-six million people.
Such is the real constitution which the Jacobins substitute for the
constitution they have prepared for show.  In the arsenal of the
monarchy which they destroyed they took the most despotic institutions
- centralization, Royal Council, lieutenants of police, special
tribunals, intendants and sub-delegates; they disinterred the antique
Roman law of lèse-majesty, refurbished old blades which civilization
had dulled, aiming them at every throat and now wielded at random
against liberties, property and lives.  It is called the
"revolutionary government;" according to official statements it is to
last until peace is secured; in the minds of genuine Jacobins it must
continue until all the French have been regenerated in accordance with
the formula.
____________________________________________________________________

Notes:

[1] Titus Flavious Clemens, (Greek writer born in Athens around 150
and dead in Cappadoce in 250) He lived in Alexandria.  (SR).

[2] The words of Marat.

[3] After the Constitution is completed, said Legendre, in the Jacobin
club, we will make the federalists dance.

[4] Archives Nationales, F.I.C..  56, (Circular of Gohier, Minister of
Justice, to the French people, July 6, 1793).  "Certain persons are
disposed to pervert the events of May 31 and June 2, by atrocious
exaggerations and the grossest fables, and prevent the fortunate
results they present from being seen.  They are absolutely determined
to see nothing but violations of the liberty of the people's
representatives in a step which was specially designed to hasten on
the Constitutional Act on which the liberty of all is established.  Of
what consequence is it who are the authors of the Constitution
presented to you? What does it matter whether it issues from a
mountain amidst lightning and the rolling thunder, like the Tables of
the Law given to the Hebrews, or whether it comes, like the laws given
to the early Romans, inspired in the tranquil asylum of a divinity
jealous of his religious surroundings? Is this constitution worthy of
a free people? That is the only question which citizens who wear the
livery of no party need examine!"

[5] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 177.  (report by Hérault Séchelles, June
10, 1793).  Ibid, XXXI., 400.  (Text of constitution submitted to
discussion June 11th, and passed June 24th.)

[6] De Sybel, II., 331.  (According to the facsimile published in the
Quarterly Review).  "Hérault says that he and four of his colleagues
are ordered to furnish the draft of a constitution by Monday."

[7] Report by Hérault-Séchelles.  (Buchez et Roux, XXVIII.  178.)

[8] Buchez et Roux, XXXI, 400.  (Articles of the Declaration of
Rights, 1, 7, 9, 11, 27, 31, 35)

[9] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 178.  Report by Hérault-Séchelles.  "Each
of us had the same desire, that of attaining to the greatest
democratic result.  The sovereignty of the people and the dignity of
man were constantly in our minds.  .  .  A secret sentiment tells us
that our work is perhaps the most popular that ever existed."

[10] Archives Nationales, B.  II., 23.  (Table of votes by the
commission appointed to collect the procès-verbaux of the adoption of
the constitution, August 20, 1793.) -- Number of primary assemblies
sending in their procès-verbaux, 6,589 (516 cantons have not yet sent
theirs in).  -- Number of voters on call, 1,795,908; Yes, 1,784,377;
Noes, 11,531.-- Number of primary assemblies voting Yes unanimously,
not on call of names, 297.  -- At Paris, 40,990 voters, at Troyes,
2,491, at Limoges, 2,137.  -- Cf.  For details and motives of
abstention, Sauzay IV.  pp.  157-161.  Albert Babeau, II, pp.  83 and
84.  Moniteur, XVII., 375 (speech by the representative Desvars).

[11] Ibid., Moniteur, XVII., 20.  (report by Barrère on the
convocation of the primary assemblies, June 17, 1793.) Ibid., 102
(Report of Cambon, July 11).  "It is now a fortnight since you
demanded a Constitution.  Very well, here it is .  .  .  .  Respect
for persons and property is amply secured in it.  Yes, more definitely
than in any other constitution.  Does it provide for its own revision?
Yes, for in six weeks, we can convoke the primary assemblies and
express our desire for the reform that may appear necessary.  - Will
the popular wish be respected? Yes, the people then will make
definitive laws."

[12] Guillon de Montléon, I., 282, 309.  -- Buchez et Roux, XXVIII,
356, 357 (Journal de Lyon Nos.  223 and 224.) "The acceptance of the
Constitution was neither entire nor very sincere; people took credit
to themselves for accepting a vicious and sketchy production."
Meillan, "Mémoires," 120.  (In July he leaves Caen for Quimper).
"Although we were assured that we should pass only through Maratist
towns, we had the satisfaction of finding nearly all the inhabitants
regarding Marat with horror.  They had indeed accepted the
Constitution offered by the Committee of Public Safety, but solely to
end the matter and on conditions which would speak well for them; for,
everywhere the renewal of the Convention was exacted and the
punishment of assaults made on it." This desire, and others analogous
to it, are given in the procès-verbaux of many of the primary
assemblies (Archives Nationales, B.  II., 23); for example, in those
of the thirteen cantons of Ain.  A demand is made, furthermore, for
the reintegration of the Twenty-two, the abolition of the
revolutionary tribunal, the suppression of absolute proconsulates, the
organization of a department guard for securing the future of the
Convention, the discharge of the revolutionary army, etc.

[13] Moniteur, XVII., 20.  Report of Barère: "The Constitutional act
is going to draw the line between republicans and royalists."

[14] Archives Nationales, F.I.C., 54.  (Circular of the Minister,
Gohier, July 6, 1793.) "It is to-day that, summoned to the alter of
the country, those who desire the Republic will be known by name, and
those who do not desire it, whether they speak or keep silent, will be
equally known."

[15] Sauzay, IV., 160, 161.  (Article by the Vidette.) Consequently,
"all the unconstitutionalists nobles and priests considered it a duty
to go the assemblies and joyfully accept a constitution which
guaranteed liberty and property to everybody."

[16] "Journal des Débats de la Société des Jacobins," No.  For July
27, 1793 (correspondence, No.  122).

[17] Moniteur, XVII., 156, 163.

[18] Sauzay, IV., 158: "The motives for judgments were thus stated by
judges themselves."

[19] Moniteur, XVII., 40, 48, 72, 140, 175, 194, 263.  (Cf.  Speeches
by Chaumette, July 14, and Report by Gossoin, August 9).  - Archives
Nationales, B.  II., 23.  Negative votes in Ardèche 5, in Aude 5,
Moselle 5, Saône-et-Loire 5, Côte-d'Or 4, Creuse 4, Haut-Rhin 4, Gers
4, Haute-Garonne 3, Aube 2, Bouches-du-Rhône 2, Cantal 2, Basses-Alpes
1, Haute-Marne 1, Haute-Vienne 1, Var 0, Seine 0.  - The details and
circumstances of voting are curious.  In the department of Aube, at
Troyes, the second section in agreement with the third, excluded
"suspects" from the vote.  At Paris, the section "Gardes Française,
Fourcroy president, announces 1,714 voters, of which 1,678 are
citizens and 36 citoyennes.  In the "Mont Blanc" section, the
secretary signs as follows: Trone segretaire general de la semblé.

[20] Moniteur, XVII., 375.  (Session of the convention, August 11,
1793).  Chabot: "I demand a law requiring every man who does not
appear at a primary meeting to give good reason for his absence; also,
that any man who has not favored the Constitution, be declared
ineligible to all constitutional franchises." Ibid., 50.  (Meeting of
the Commune, July 4th).  Leonard Bourdon demands, in the name of his
section, the Gravilliers, a register on which to inscribe those who
accept the Constitution, "in order that those who do not vote for it
may be known." - Souzay, IV.  159.  M. Boillon, of Belleherbe, is
arrested "for being present at the primary assembly of the canton of
Vaucluse, and when called upon to accept the Constitutional act,
leaving without voting."

[21] Moniteur, XVII., 11.  (Instructions on the mode of accepting the
Constitution).  - Sauzay IV., 158.  - Moniteur, XVII., 302.  (Speech
by Garat, August 2.) "I have dispatched commissioners to push the
Constitutional Act through the primary assemblies." - Durand-Maillane.
150.  "The envoys of the departments were taken from the sans-
culotterie then in fashion, because they ruled in the Convention."

[22] Sauzay, IV., 158.

[23] Moniteur, XVII., 363.  (Report of Gossuin to the Convention,
August 9).  "There are primary assemblies which have extended their
deliberations beyond the acceptance of the Constitution.  This
acceptance being almost unanimous, all other objects form matter for
petitions to be entrusted to competent committees.""--Ibid., 333.
(Speech of Delacroix).  "The anti-revolutionary delegates sent by the
conspirators we had in the Convention must be punished.  (August 6.).

[24] Moniteur, ibid., 333.  Speech and motions of Bazire, August 8.  -
XIX., 116.  Report of Vouland, January 2, 1794.  The pay of Maillard
and his acolytes amounted to twenty-two thousand livres.  - XVIII.,
324.  (Session of August 5.  Speeches of Gossuin, Thibault and
Lacroix.) - Ibid., 90.  (Session of Germinal 8, year III.) Speech by
Bourdon de l'Oise: "We have been obliged to pick men out of the envoys
in order to find those disposed for rigorous measures."

[25] Moniteur, XVII., 330.  Ordinance of the Commune, August 6.

[26] Moniteur, XVII., 332.  (Session of the Convention, August 6.) -
Cf.  the "Diurnal" of Beaulieu, August 6.  Beaulieu mentions several
deputations and motions of the same order, and states the alarm of the
"Mountain." - Durand-Maillane, "Mémoires," 151.  "Among the envoys
from the departments were sensible men who, far from approving of all
the steps taken by their brethren, entertained and manifested very
contrary sentiments.  These were molested and imprisoned." - "Archives
des Affaires étrangères," vol.  1411.  (Report of the agents of August
10 and 11.) The department commissioners .  .  .  seemed to us in the
best disposition.  There are some intriguers among them, however; we
are following up some of them, and striving by fraternizing with them
to prevent them from being seduced or led away by the perfidious
suggestions of certain scoundrels, the friends of federalism, amongst
them.  .  .  .  A few patriotic commissioners have already denounced
several of their brethren accused of loving royalty and federalism."


[27] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 408.

[28] Moniteur., XVII., 330.  (Act passed by the Commune, August 6.)

[29] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  1411.  (Reports of
agents, Aug.  10 and 11).  "Citizens are, to-day, eager to see who
shall have a commissioner at his table: who shall treat him the best .
.  .  the Commissioners of the primary assemblies come and fraternise
with them in the Jacobin club.  They adopt their maxims, and are
carried away by the energy of the good and true republican sans-
culottes in the clubs."

[30] Moniteur, XVII., 307, 308.  (Report of Couthon to the Convention,
Aug.  2.) "You would wound, you would outrage these Republicans, were
you to allow the performance before them of an infinity of pieces
filled with insulting allusions to liberty."

[31] Ibid.  124.  (Session of Aug.  5.)

[32] Ibid., 314; (Letter of Lhuillier, Aug.  4.) - 322, Session of the
Commune, Aug.  4th; 332, (Session of the Convention, Aug.  6).  -
Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 409.  (Meeting of the Jacobin Club, Aug.
5th).

[33] Buchez et Roux, 411 (Article in the Journal de la Montagne.)

[34] Moniteur, XVII., 348.

[35] "Le Féderation" was in 1790 "the Association of the National
Guards." (SR).

[36] Buchez et Roux, XVIII., 415 and following pages.

[37] Ibid., 352.  - Cf.  Beaulieu, "Diurnal," Aug.  9.

[38] On the mechanical character of the festivals of the Revolution
read the programme of "The civic fete in honor of Valor and Morals,"
ordered by Fouché at Nevers, on the 1st day of the 1st decade of the
2nd month of the year II.  (De Martel, "Etude sur Fouché," 202); also,
the programme of the "Fete de l'Etre Supréme," at Sceaux, organized by
the patriot Palloy, Presidial 20, year II.  (Dauban, "Paris en 1794,
p.187).

[39] It cost one million two hundred thousand francs, besides the
traveling expenses of eight thousand delegates.

[40] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 439, and following pages.  Procès verbal
of he National Festival of the 10th of August.  - Dauban "La Demagogie
en 1791." (Extract from the Republican Ritual.)

[41] Moniteur, XVII., 366.  (Session of Aug.  11.  Speech by Lacroix
and decree in conformity therewith.)

[42] Ibid., 374.  "Remember that you are accountable to the nation and
the universe for this sacred Ark.  Remember that it is your duty to
die rather than suffer a sacrilegious hand....."

[43] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 358.  It is evident from the context of
the speech that Robespierre and the Jacobins were desirous of
maintaining the Convention because they foresaw Girondist elections.

[44] Moniteur, XVII., 382.  (Session of Aug.  12.  Speech by Lacroix).

[45] Ibid., 387.  - Cf.  Ibid., 410, session of August 16.  The
delegates return there to insist on a levy, en masse, the levy of the
first class not appearing sufficient to them.  (levy means
mobilization of all men) - Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 464.  Delegate
Royer, Curé of Chalons-sur-Saone, demands that the aristocrats
"chained together in sixes" be put in the front rank in battle "to
avoid the risks of sauve qui peut."

[46] Decrees of August 14 and 16.

[47] Moniteur, XVII., 375.

[48] Riouffe, "Mémoires," 19: "An entire generation, the real
disciples of Jean-Jacques, Voltaire and Diderot, could be, and was
annihilated, to a large extent under the pretext of federalism."

[49] Moniteur, XVII., 102.  (Speech by Cambon, July 11, 1793).
Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 46.  (Speech of General Wimpffen to the
"Société des amis de la Liberté et de l'Egalité," in session at
Cherbourg, June 25, 1793).  "Sixty-four departments have already
revoked the powers conferred on their representatives." Meillan,
"Mémoires," 72: "The archives of Bordeaux once contained the acts
passed by seventy-two departments, all of which adhered to measures
nearly the same as those indicted in our documents."

[50] Buchez et Roux, XVIII., 148.  -- Meillan, 70, 71.  -- Guillon de
Montléon, I., 300 (on Lyons) and I., 280 (on Bordeaux).  Archives
Nationales, AF II., 46.  (Deliberations of the Nantes section July 5).
-- Letter of Merlin and Gillet, representatives on mission, Lorient,
June 12.  Dissatisfaction at the outrages of May 31 and June 2, was so
manifest that the representatives on mission Merline, Gillet,
Savestre, and Cagaignac print on the 14th of June a resolution
authorising one of their body to go to the Convention and protest "in
their name" against the weakness shown by it and against the
ursurpations of the Paris commune.  -- Sauzay, IV., 260.  At Besançon,
in a general assembly of all the administrative, judicial and
municipal bodies of the department joined to the commissioners of the
section, protest "unanimously" on the 15th of June.

[51] Archives Nationales, Ibid .(Letter of Romme and Prieur, Caen,
June 10th, to the committee of Public Safety).  The insurgents are so
evidently in the right that Romme and Prieur approve of their own
arrest.  "Citizens, our colleagues, this arrest may be of great
importance, serve the cause of liberty, maintain the unity of the
republic and revive confidence if, as we hasten to demand it of you,
you confirm it by a decree which declares us hostages.  .  .  .  We
have noticed that among the people of Caen, there is a love of
liberty, as well as of justice and docility."

[52] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 46.  (Printed July 5).  Result of
the deliberations of the Nantes sections.  The act is signed by the
three administrative bodies of Nantes, by the district rulers of
Clisson, Anceries and Machecoul, who had fled to Nantes, and by both
the deputies of the districts of Paimbuf and Chateaubriand, in all,
eighty-six signatures.

[53] Archives Nationales, ibid., (letter of General Wimpffen to the
"Societé des Amis de l'Egalité et de la Liberté" in session at
Cherbourg, June 25, 1793).  - Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 126.  - On the
opinion of the departments cf.  Paul Thibaud ("Etudes sur l'histoire
de Grenoble et du Department de l'Isére").  - Louis Guibert ("Le Parti
Girondin dans le Haute Vienne").  - Jarrin, ("Bourg et Bellay pendant
la Révolution").

[54] Albert Babeau, II., 83.  (Pamphlet by the curé of Cleray).
"Every primary assembly that accepts the Constitution strikes the
factions a blow on the head with the club of Hercules."

[55] Cf.  "The Revolution," Vol.  II.  Ch.  XI.

[56] Buzot.  - Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 157.  Reports by Baudot
and Ysabeau to the Convention.  The 19th of Aug.  At the Hotel de
Ville of Bordeaux, they eulogize the 21st of January: "There was then
a roar as frightful as it was general.  A city official coolly replied
to us: What would you have? To oppose anarchy we have been forced to
join the aristocrats, and they rule." Another says ironically to
Ysabeau: "We did not anticipate that, -- they are our tribunes."

[57] Jarrin, "Bourg et Belley pendant la Révolution" ("Annales de la
Societé d'Emulation de l'Ain, 1878, Nos.  For January, February and
March, p.  16).

[58] Louvet, 103, 108.  - Guillon de Montléon, I., 305 and following
pages.  - Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 151.  (Report of the delegates of
the district of Andelys).  "One of members observed that there would
be a good deal of trouble in raising an armed force of one thousand
men." - An administrator (a commissioner of Calvados) replied: "We
shall have all the aristocrats on our side." The principal military
leaders at Caen and at Lyons, Wimpffen, Précy, Puisaye, are Feuillants
and form only a provisional alliance with the Girondists properly so
called, Hence constant contentions and reciprocal mistrust.  Birotteau
and Chapet leave Lyons because they do not find the spirit of the
place sufficiently republican.

[59] Louvet, 124, 129.  - Buchez et Roux, XXVII, 360.  (Notice by
General Wimpffen), July 7.  - Puisaye, "Mémoires" and "L'Insurrection
Normande." by et Vaultier et Mancel.

[60] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 471.  Letter of Barbaroux, Caen, June
18.  - Ibid., 133.  Letter of Madame Roland to Buzot, July 7.  "You
are not the one to march at the head of battalions (departmental).  It
would have the appearance of gratifying personal vengeance."

[61] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 153.  (Deliberations of the constituted
authorities of Marseilles, June 7.)

[62] Guillon de Montléon, II., 40.  The contrast between the two
parties is well shown in the following extract from the letter of a
citizen of Lyons to Kellerman's soldiers.  "They tell you that we want
to destroy the unity of the republic, while they themselves abandon
the frontiers to the enemy in order to come here and cut their
brethren's throats."

[63] Guillon de Montléon, I., 288.  - Marcelin Boudet, "Les
Conventionnels d'Auvergne," p.  181.  - Louvet, 193.  - Moniteur,
XVII., 101.  (Speech of Cambon, July 11).  "We have preferred to
expose these funds (one hundred and five millions destined for the
army) to being intercepted, rather than to retard this dispatch.  The
first thing the Committee of Public Safety have had to care for was to
save the republic and make the administrations fully responsible for
it.  They were fully aware of this, and accordingly have allowed the
circulation of these funds .  .  .  They have been forced, through the
wise management of the Committee, to contribute themselves to the
safety of the republic."

[64] Archives Nationales, Letter of Robert Lindet, June 16, AF.  II.,
43.  The correspondence of Lindet, which is very interesting, well
shows the sentiments of the Lyonnese and the policy of the "Mountain."
"However agitated Lyons may be, order prevails; nobody wants either
king or tyrant; all use the same language: the words republic, union,
are in everybody's mouth." (Eight letters.) He always gives the same
advice to the Committee of Public Safety: "Publish a constitution,
publish the motives of the bills of arrest," which are indispensable
to rally everybody to the Convention, (June 15).


[65] Guillon de Montléon, I., 309 (July 24).

[66] Sauzay, IV., 268.  - Paul Thibaud, 50.  - Marcelin Boudet, 185.
- Archives Nationales AF.  II., 46.  Extract from the registers of the
Council of the department of Loire-Inferieure, July 14.  The
department protests that its decree of July 5 was not "a rupture with
the Convention, an open rebellion against the laws of the State, an
idea very remote from the sentiments and intentions of the citizens
present." Now, "the plan of a Constitution is offered to the
acceptance of the sovereign.  This fortunate circumstance should bring
people to one mind, and, with hope thus renewed, let us at once seize
on the means of salvation thus presented to us." - Moniteur, XVII.,
102.  (Speech of Cambon, July 11.)

[67] Louvet, 119, 128, 150, 193.  - Meillan, 130, 141.  (On the
disposition and sentiments of the provinces and of the public in
general, the reader will find ample and authentic details in the
narratives of the fugitives who scattered themselves in all
directions, and especially those of Louvet, Meillan, Dulaure, and
Vaublanc.) Cf.  the "Mémoires de Hua" and "Un Séjour en France in 1792
and 1795." - Mallet-du-Pan already states this disposition before 1789
(MS.  Journal).  "June, 1785: The French live simply in a crowd; they
must all cling together.  On the promenades they huddle together and
jostle each other in one alley; the same when there is more space."
"Aug., 1787, (after the first riots): I have remarked in general more
curiosity than excitement in the multitude.  .  .  .  One can judge,
at this moment, the national character; a good deal of bravado and
nonsense; neither reason, rule nor method; rebellious in crowds, and
not a soul that does not tremble in the presence of a corporal."

[68] Meillan, 143.  - Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 203.  (Session of
August 10).  - Mallet-du-Pan, "Mémoires," II., 9.

[69] Ernest Daudet, "His.  des Conspirations royalistes dans le midi."
(Books II.  And III.)

[70] Guillon de Montléon, I., 313.  (Address of a Lyonais to the
patriot soldiers under Kellerman.)

[71] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 222.  - The insurrection of Toulon,
Girondist at the start, dates July 1st.  - Letter of the new
administrators of Toulon to the Convention.  "W desire the Republic,
one and indivisible; there is no sign of rebellion with us.  .  .
Representatives Barras and Fréron lie shamefully in depicting us as
anti-revolutionaries, on good terms with the English and the families
of Vendée." - The Toulon administrators continue furnishing the
Italian army with supplies.  July 19, an English boat, sent to parley,
had to lower the white flag and hoist the tri-color flag.  The entry
of the English into Toulon did not take place before the 29th of
August.

[72] Guillon de Montléon, II., 67.  (Letter of the Lyonnese to the
representatives of the people, Sep.  20): "The people of Lyons have
constantly respected the laws, and if, as in some departments, that of
Rhone-et-Loire was for a moment mistaken in the events of May 31, they
hastened, as soon as they believed that the Convention was not
oppressed, to recognize and execute its decrees.  Every day, now that
these reach it, they are published and observed within its walls."

[73] Moniteur, XVII., 269.  (Session of July 28).  (Letter of the
administrators of the department of Rhone-et-Loire to the Convention,
Lyons, July 24).  "We present to the Convention our individual
recantation and declaration; in conforming to the law we are entitled
to its protection.  We petition the court to decide on our
declaration, and to repeal the acts which relate to us or make an
exception in our favor.  .  .  We have always professed ourselves to
be true republicans."

[74] Guillon de Montléon, I., 309, 311, 315, 335.  -- Mortimer-
Ternaux, VIII., 197.

[75] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 141.

[76] Mallet du Pan, I., 379 and following pages; I., 408; II., 10.

[77] Entry of the Republican troops into Lyons, October 9th, into
Toulon, December 19th.  - Bordeaux had submitted on the 2nd of August.
Exasperated by the decree of the 6th which proscribed all the abettors
of the insurrection, the city drives out, on the 19th, the
representatives Baudot and Ysabeau.  It submits again on the 19th of
September.  But so great is the indignation of the citizens, Tallien
and his three colleagues dare not enter before the 16th of October.
(Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 197 and following pages.)

[78] Seventy thousand men were required to reduce Lyons, (Guillon de
Montléon, II., 226) and sixty thousand men to reduce Toulon.

[79] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  CCCXXIX.  (Letter of
Chépy, political agent, Grenoble, July 26, 1793).  "I say it
unhesitatingly, I had rather reduce Lyons than save Valenciennes."

[80] Ibid., vol.  CCCXXIX.  (Letter of Chépy, Grenoble, August 24,
1793): "The Piedmontese are masters of Cluse.  A large body of
mountaineers have joined them.  At Annecy the women have cut down the
liberty pole and burnt the archives of the club and commune.  At
Chambéry, the people wanted to do the same, but they forced the sick
in the hospitals to take arms and thus kept them down."

[81]  Moniteur, XVIII, 474.  (Report of Billaud-Varennes, October 18,
1793).  "The combined efforts of all the powers of Europe have not
compromised liberty and the country so much as the federalist
factions; the assassin the most to be dreaded is the one that lives in
the house."

[82] The convention purposely reinstates incendiaries and assassins.
(Moniteur, XVIII., 483.  Session of Breumaire 28, year II.) : XVII.,
176.  (Session of July 19, 1793).  Rehabilitation of Bordier and
Jourdain, hung in August, 1789.  Cancelling of the proceedings begun
against the authors of the massacre of Melun (September, 1792) and
release of the accused.  -- Cf.  Albert Babeau, (I., 277.)
Rehabilitation, with indemnities distributed in Messidor, year II, to
their relatives.  - "Archives des Affaires étrangères," vol.  331.
(Letter of Chépy, Grenoble, Frimaire 8, year II).  "The criminal court
and jury of the department have just risen to the height of the
situation; they have acquitted the castle-burners."

[83] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 593.  (Deputation of twenty-four
sections sent from Bordeaux to the Convention, August 30).  - Buchez
et Roux, XXVIII., 494.  (Report of the representatives on mission in
Bouches-du-Rhône, September 2nd).  - Ibid., XXX., 386.  (Letter of
Rousin, commandant of the revolutionary army at Lyons.  "A population
of one hundred twenty thousand souls.  .  .  .  .  There are not
amongst all these, one thousand five hundred patriots, even one
thousand five hundred persons that one could spare.  - Guillon de
Montléon, I., 355, 374.  (Signatures of twenty thousand Lyonnese of
all classes, August 17th).

[84] Guillon de Montléon, I., 394.  (Letter of Dubois-Crancé to the
Lyonnese, August 19th.)

[85] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 198.  (Decree of Aug.  6.) - Buchez et
Roux, XXVIII.  297, (Decree of July 12.).  - Guillon de Montléon, I.,
342.  Summons of Dubois-Crancé, Aug.  8.)

[86] Meillan, 142.).  - "Archives des Affaires Etrangéres," vol.
CCCXXXII.  (Letter of Desgranges, Bordeaux, Brumaire 8, year II.):
"The execution of Mayor Saige, who was much loved by the people for
his benefactions, caused much sorrow: but no guilty murmur was heard."

[87] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 46.  (Letter of Julien to the
Committee of Public Safety Messidor 11, year II).  "Some time ago a
solemn silence prevailed at the sessions of the military commission,
the people's response to the death-sentences against conspirators; the
same silence attended them to the scaffold; the whole commune seemed
to sob in secret at their fate."

[88] Berryat Saint-Prix, "La Justice Révolutionaire," pp.  277-299.  -
Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 46.  (Registers of the Com.  Of
Surveillance, Bordeaux).  The number of prisoners between Prairial 21
and 28, varies from 1504 to 1529.  Number of the guillotined, 882.
(Memoirs of Sénart).

[89] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 46.  Letter of Julien, Messidor
12, year II.  "A good deal has been stolen here; the mayor, now in
prison, is informed of considerable losses.  The former Committee of
surveillance came under serious suspicion; many people who were
outlawed only escaped by paying: it is a fact that .  .  .  Of a
number of those who have thus purchased their lives there are some who
did not deserve to die and who, nevertheless, were threatened with
death." - Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 428.  (Extracts from the Memoirs of
Sénart).  "The president of the military commission was a man named
Lacombe, already banished from the city on account of a judgment
against him for robbery.  The other individuals employed by Tallien
comprised a lot of valets, bankrupts and sharpers."

[90] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 493.  (Speech by Danton, August 31, and
decree in conformity therewith by the Convention).

[91] Mallet-Dupan, II., 17.  "Thousands of traders in Marseilles and
Bordeaux, here the respectable Gradis and there the Tarteron, have
been assassinated and their goods sold.  I have seen the thirty-second
list only of the Marseilles emigres, whose property has been
confiscated.  .  .  .  There are twelve thousand of them and the lists
are not yet complete." (Feb.  1, 1794.) - Anne Plumptre.2A Narrative
of Three years' Residence in France, from 1802 to 1805." "During this
period the streets of Marseilles were almost those of a deserted town.
One could go from one end of the town to the other without meeting any
one he could call an inhabitant.  The great terrorists, of whom
scarcely one was a Marseillaise, the soldiers and roughs as they
called themselves, were almost the only persons encountered." The
latter, to the number of fifty or sixty, in jackets with leather
straps, fell upon all whom they did not like, and especially on
anybody with a clean shirt and white cravat.  Many persons on the
"Cours" were thus whipped to death.  No women went out-doors without a
basked, while every man wore a jacket, without which they were taken
for aristocrats.  (II., 94.)

[92] "Mémoires de Fréron." (Collection Barrière and Berville).
Letters of Fréron to Moise Bayle, Brumaire 23, Pluviose 5 and 11,
Novose 16, II, published by Moise Bayle, also details furnished by
Huard, pp.  350-365.  - Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 144.  (Order of
representatives Fréron, Barras, Salicetti and Richard, Novose 17, year
II.)

[93] Mallet-Dupan, II., 17.  - Guillon de Montléon, II., 259.

[94] Ibid., II., 281.  (Decree of the Convention, Oct.  12); II.  312.
(Orders of Couthon and his colleagues, Oct.  25); II., 366-372
(Instructions of the temporary commission, Brumaire 26).

[95] Ibid.  III., 153-156.  Letter of Laporte to Couthon, April 13,
1794.

[96] The contemporary French Encyclopedia "QUID" ed.  Lafont, 1996
states on page 755 that according to Louis Marie Prudhomme there were
31 000 victims at Lyons.  (SR.)

[97] Ibid.  II.  135-137.  (Resolutions of the Revolutionary
Commission, Germinal 17.) and Letters of Cadillot to Robespierre,
Floréal, year II).  III., 63.

[98] Guillon de Montléon, II., 399.  (Letter of Perrotin, member of
the temporary commission to the revolutionary committee of Moulin.)
"The work before the new commission may be considered as an
Organization of the Septembrisade; the process will be the same but
legalized by an act passed."

[99] Buchez et Roux, XXIX., 192.  (Decree of October 12).

[100] Ibid., XXX., 457.  (Decree of November 23).

[101] "Mémoires de Fréron." (Letter of Fréron, Nivose 6).  - Guillon
de Montléon, II., 391.

[102] Decrees of October 12 and December 24.  - Archives Nationales,
AF.  II., 44.  The representatives on mission wanted to do the same
thing with Marseilles.  (Orders of Fréron, Barras, Salicetti, and
Ricard, Nivôse 17, year II.) "The name of Marseilles, still borne by
this criminal city, shall be changed.  The National Convention shall
be requested to give it another name.  Meanwhile it shall remain
nameless and be thus known." In effect, in several subsequent
documents, Marseilles is called the nameless commune.

[103] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 204.  (Session of June 24: "Strong
expressions of dissent are heard on the right." Legendre, "I demand
that the first rebel, the first man there (pointing to the "Right"
party) who interrupts the speaker, be sent to the Abbaye." Couhey,
indeed, was sent to the Abbaye for applauding a Federalist speech.  -
Cf.  on these three months.  - Mortimer-Ternaux, vol.  VIII.

[104] Buchez et Roux, XXIX., 175.  - Dauban: "La Démagogie à Paris en
1793," 436 (Narrative by Dulaure, an eye-witness).

[105] There were really only twenty-two brought before the
revolutionary tribunal.

[106] Dauban, XXVI., p.  440.  (Narrative of Blanqui, one of the
seventy-three.)

[107] Buchez et Roux.  XXIX., 178, 179.  Osselin: "I demand the decree
of accusation against them all." - Amar: "The apparently negative
conduct of the minority of the Convention since the 2nd of June, was a
new plot devised by Barbaroux." Robespierre: "If there are other
criminals among those you have placed under arrest the Committee of
General Security will present to you the nomenclature of them and you
will always be at liberty to strike."

[108] Ibid., XXIX., 432, 437, 447.  - Report by Amar.  (this report
served as the bill of indictment against them, "cowardly satellites of
royal despotism, vile agents of foreign tyrants." - Wallon, II., 407,
409.  (Letter of Fouquier-Tinville to the convention).  "After the
special debates, will not each of the accused demand a general
prosecution? The trial, accordingly, will be interminable.  Besides,
one may ask why should there be witnesses? The convention, all France,
accuses those on trial.  The evidence of their crimes is plain;
everybody is convinced of their guilt.  .  .  .  It is the Convention
which must remove all formalities that interfere with the course
pursued by the tribunal." - Moniteur, XVII., (Session of October 28),
291.  The decree provoked by a petition of Jacobins, is passed on
motion of Osselin, aggravated by Robespierre.

[109] Louvet, "Mémoires," 321.  (List of the Girondists who perished
or who were proscribed.  Twenty-four fugitives survived.)

[110] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 395, 416, 435.  The terror and disgust
of the majority is seen in the small number of voters.  Their
abstention from voting is the more significant in relation to the
election of the dictators.  The members of the Committee of Public
Safety, elected on the 16th of July, obtain from one hundred to one
hundred and ninety-two votes.  The members of the Committee of
Security obtain from twenty-two to one hundred and thirteen votes.
The members of the same committee, renewed on the 11th of September,
obtain from fifty-two to one hundred and eight votes.  The judges of
the revolutionary tribunal, completed on the 3rd of August, obtain
from forty-seven to sixty-five votes.  - Meillan, 85.  (In relation to
the institution of the revolutionary government, on motion of Bazire,
Aug.  28).  "Sixty or eighty deputies passed this decree.  .  .  it
was preceded by another passed by a plurality of thirty against ten.
.  .  For two months the session the best attended, contains but one
hundred deputies.  The Montagnards overran the departments to deceive
or intimidate the people.  The rest, discouraged, keep away from the
meetings or take no part in the proceedings."

[111] The meaning and motives of this declaration are clearly
indicated in Bazire's speech.  "Since the adoption of the
Constitution," he says, "Feuillantism has raised its head; a struggle
has arisen between energetic and moderate patriots.  At the end of the
Constituent Assembly, the Feuillants possessed themselves of the words
law, order, public, peace, security, to enchain the zeal of the
friends of freedom; the same manuvres are practiced to-day.  You must
shatter the weapon in your enemies' hands, which they use against
you." - Durand-Maillane, 154.  "The simple execution of constitutional
laws," said Bazire, "made for peaceable times, would be impotent among
the conspiracies that surround you." - Meillan, 108.

[112] Moniteur, XVIII, 106.  (Report of Saint-Just on the organization
of the revolutionary government, October 10th, and the decree in
conformity therewith.) Ibid., 473.  (Report of Billaud-Varennes on a
mode of provisional and revolutionary government, Nov.  18th, and
decree in conformity therewith.) - Ib., 479 (session of Nov.  22nd,
1793,.- Speech of Hébrard, spokesman of a deputation from Cantal).  "A
central committee of surveillance, a revolutionary army, has been
established in our department.  Aristocrats, suspects, the doubtful,
moderates, egoists, all gentlemen without distinguishing those who
have done nothing for the revolution from those who have acted against
it, await in retirement the ulterior measures required by the
interests of the Republic.  I have said without distinction of the
indifferent from the suspects; for we hold to these words of Solon's:
" He who is not with us is against us."

[113] The trousers used in pre-Revolutionary France by the nobility
was called culottes, they terminated just below the knee where the
long cotton or silken stockings would begin.  The less affluent used
long trousers and no socks and became known as the Sans-culottes which
became , as mentioned in vol.  II.  a nickname for the revolutionary
proletariat.  (SR.)

[114] Moniteur, (Speech by Danton, March 26, 1794.) "In creating
revolutionary committees the desire was to establish a species of
dictatorship of citizens the most devoted to liberty over those who
rendered themselves suspects."

[115] Mallet-Dupan, II., 8.  (February, 1794).  "At this moment the
entire people is disarmed.  Not a gun can be found either in town or
country.  If anything attests the super-natural power which the
leaders of the Convention enjoy, it is to see, in one instant, through
one act of the will and nobody offering any resistance, or complaining
of it, the nation from Perpignan to Lille, deprived of every means of
defense against oppression, with a facility still more unprecedented
than that which attended the universal arming of the nation in 1789."
- "A Residence in France," II., 409.  "The National Guard as a regular
institution was in great part suppressed after the summer of 1793,
those who composed it being gradually disarmed.  Guard-mounting was
continued, but the citizens performing this service were, with very
few exceptions, armed with pikes, and these again were not fully
entrusted to them; each man, on quitting his post, gave up his arms
more punctually than if he had been bound to do so through
capitulation with a victorious enemy."

[116] Moniteur, XVIII., 106.  (Report by Saint-Just, Oct.  10th).

[117] Ibid., 473.  (Report of Billaud-Varennes, Nov.  13th).

[118] Ibid., XVIII., 591.  (Speech by Couthon, December 4th).  Ibid.,
Barère: "Electoral assemblies are monarchical institutions, they
attach to royalism, they must be specially avoided in revolutionary
times."

[119] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 40.  (Decree passed on the proposition
of Danton, session of September 13th).  The motive alleged by Danton
is that "members are still found on the committees whose opinions, at
least, approach federalism." Consequently the committees are purified,
and particularly the Committee of General Security.  Six of its
members are stricken off (Sept.  14), and the list sent in by the
Committee of Public safety passes without discussion.

[120] Moniteur, XVIII., 592.  (Session of December 4, speech by
Robespierre).

[121] Miot de Melito, "Mémoires," I., 47.

[122] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 153.  Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 443.
(Decree of September 28th).  - Wallon, "Histoire du Tribunal
Révolutionaire de Paris," IV., 112.

[123] Buchez et Roux, XXXIV., 300.  (Trial of Fouquier-Tinville and
associates).  Bill of indictment: "One of these publicly boasted of
always having voted death.  Others state that they were content to see
people to give their judgment; physical inspection alone determined
them to vote death.  Another said, that when there was no offense
committed it was necessary to imagine one.  Another is a regular sot
and has never sat in judgment but in a state of intoxication.  Others
came to the bench only to fire their volleys." Etc.  (Supporting
evidence.) - Observe, moreover, that judges and juries are bound to
kill under penalty of death (Ibid.,30)." Fouquier-Tinville states that
on the 22nd of Prairial he took the same step (to resign) with
Chatelet, Brochet and Lerry, when they met Robespierre, returning to
the National Convention arm-in-arm with Barère.  Fouquier adds, that
they were treated as aristocrats and anti-revolutionaries, and
threatened with death if they refused to remain on their posts."
Analogous declarations by Pigeot, Ganne, Girard, Dupley, Foucault,
Nollin and Madre.  "Sellier adds, that the tribunal having
remonstrated against the law of Prairial 22, he was threatened with
arrest by Dumas.  Had we resigned, he says, Dumas would have
guillotined us.

[124] Moniteur, XXIV., 12.  (Session of Ventôse 29, year III., speech
by Baileul).  "Terror subdued all minds, suppressed all emotions; it
was the force of the government, while such was this government that
the numerous inhabitants of a vast territory seemed to have lost the
qualities which distinguish man from a domestic animal.  They seemed
even to have no life except what the government accorded to them.
Human personality no longer existed; each individual was simply a
machine, going, coming, thinking or not thinking as he was impelled or
stimulated by tyranny."

[125] Decree of Frimaire 14, year II., Dec.  4, 1793.

[126] Moniteur, XVII., 473, 474, 478.  (Speech by Billaud-Varennes).
"The sword of Damocles must henceforth be brandished over the entire
surface." This expression of Billaud sums up the spirit of every new
institution.

[127] Moniteur, XVIII., 275.  (Session of Oct.  26.  1793, speech by
Barère.) "This is the most revolutionary step you can take."
(Applause.)

[128] Ibid., 520.  (Report of Barère and decree in conformity).  "The
representatives sent on mission are required to conform strictly to
the acts of the Committee of Public Safety.  Generals and other agents
of the executive power will, under no pretext, obey any special order,
that they may refuse to carry out the said acts." - Moniteur, XVIII.,
291.  (Report by Barère, Oct.  29, 1793.) At this date one hundred and
forty representatives are on mission.

[129] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 22.  (Papers of the 'Committee of
Public Safety.  Note on the results of the revolutionary government
without either date or signature.) "The law of Frimaire 14 created two
centers of influence from which action spread, in the sense of the
Committee, and which affected the authorities.  These two pivots of
revolutionary rule outside the Committee were the representatives of
the people on missions and the national agents controlling the
district committees.  The word revolutionary government alone
exercised an incalculable magical influence." - Mallet-Dupan,
"Mémoires," II., p.  2, and following pages.



BOOK SECOND.  THE JACOBIN PROGRAM.

CHAPTER I.

I.   The Doctrine.

Program of the Jacobin party.  -- Abstract principle and spontaneous
development of the theory.

Nothing is more dangerous than a general idea in narrow and empty
minds: as they are empty, it finds no knowledge there to interfere
with it; as they are narrow it is not long before it occupies the
place entirely.  Henceforth they no longer belong to themselves but
are mastered by it; it works in them and through them, the man, in the
true sense of the word, being possessed.  Something which is not
himself, a monstrous parasite, a foreign and disproportionate
conception, lives within him, developing and giving birth to the evil
purposes with which it is pregnant.  He did not foresee that he would
have them; he did not know what his dogma contained, what venomous and
murderous consequences were to issue from it.  They issue from it
fatally, each in its turn, and under the pressure of circumstances, at
first anarchical consequences and now despotic consequences.  Having
obtained power, the Jacobin brings his fixed idea along with him;
whether at the head of the government or in opposition to it, this
idea is fruitful, and the all-powerful dogma projects over a new
domain the innumerable links of its endless chain.

II.   A Communist State..

The Jacobin concept of Society.  -- The Contrat-Social.  -- Total
surrender of the Individual to the Community.  -- Everything belongs
to the State.  -- Confiscations and Sequestrations.  -- Pre-emption
and requisition and requisition of produce and merchandise.  --
Individuals belong to the State.-- Drafts of persons for Military
service.  -- Drafts of persons for the Civil service.  -- The State
philanthropist, educator, theologian, moralist, censor and director of
ideas and intimate feelings.

Let us trace this inward development and go back, along with the
Jacobin, to first principles, to the original pact, to the first
organization of society.  There is but one just and sound society, the
one founded on the "contrat-social," and

 "the clauses of this contract, fully understood, reduce themselves to
one, the total transfer of each individual, with all his rights, to
the community, .  .  .  .  each surrendering himself up absolutely,
just as he actually stands, he and all his forces, of which the
property he possesses forms a part."[1]

There must be no exception or reservation.  Nothing of what he
previously was, or had, now belongs to him in his own right;
henceforth, what he is, or has, devolves upon him only through
delegation.  His property and his person now form a portion of the
commonwealth.  If he is in possession of these, his ownership is at
second hand; if he derives any benefit there from, it is as a
concession.  He is their depository, trustee and administrator, and
nothing more.[2]  In other words, with respect to these he is simply a
managing director, that is to say a functionary like others, with a
precarious appointment and always revocable by the State which has
appointed him.

 "As nature gives to every man absolute power over the members of his
body the social pact gives the social body absolute power over all its
members."

The State, as omnipotent sovereign and universal proprietor, exercises
at discretion, its boundless rights over persons and things;
consequently we, its representatives, take all things and persons into
our hands; as they belong to it, so do they belong to us.

We have confiscated the possessions of the clergy, amounting to about
four billion livres; we confiscate the property of the emigrés,
amounting to three billion livres;[3] we confiscate the property of
the guillotined and deported: all this amounts to some hundreds of
millions; later on, the count will be made, because the list remains
open and is being daily added to.  We will sequestrate the property of
"suspects," which gives us the right to use it: here are many hundred
millions more; after the war and the banishment of "suspects," we
shall seize the property along with its income: here, again, are
billions of capital.[4] Meanwhile we take the property of hospitals
and of other benevolent institutions, about eight hundred million
livres ; we take the property of factories, of endowments, of
educational institutions, and of literary and scientific associations:
another lot of millions.[5] We take back the domains rented or
surrendered by the State for the past three centuries and more, which
gives again about a couple of billions.[6] We take the possessions of
the communes up to the amount of their indebtedness.  We have already
received as inheritance the ancient domains of the crown, also the
later domain of the civil list.  More than three-fifths[7] of the soil
thus falls into our hands, which three-fifths are much the best
stocked; they comprise almost all the large and fine edifices,
châteaux, abbeys, mansions, houses of superintendents and nearly all
the royal, episcopal, seigniorial and bourgeois stock of rich and
elegant furniture; all plate, libraries, pictures and artistic objects
accumulated for centuries.  -- Remark, again, the seizure of specie
and all other articles of gold and silver; in the months alone of
November and December, 1793, this swoop puts into our coffers three or
four hundred millions,[8] not assignats, but ringing coin.  In short,
whatever the form of established capital may be we take all we can get
hold of, probably more than three-fourths of it.  -- There remains the
portion which is not fixed capital, that which disappears in use,
namely, all that is consumed, all the fruits of the soil, every
description of provision, all the products of human art and labor
which contribute the maintenance of existence.  Through "the right of
pre-emption" and through the right of "requisition," "the Republic
becomes temporary proprietor of whatever commerce, manufacture and
agriculture have produced and added to the soil of France: "all food
and merchandise is ours before being owned by their holder.  We carry
out of his house whatever suits us; we pay him for this with worthless
paper; we frequently do not pay him at all.  For greater convenience,
we seize objects directly and wherever we find them, grain in the
farmer's barn, hay in the reaper's shed, cattle in the fold, wine in
the vats, hides at the butcher's, leather in the tanneries, soap,
tallow, sugar, brandy, cloths, linens and the rest, in stores, depots
and ware-houses.  We stop vehicles and the horses in the street.  We
enter the premises of mail or coach contractors and empty their
stables.  We carry away kitchen utensils to obtain the copper ; we
turn people out of their rooms to get their beds; we strip them of
their coats and shirts; in one day, we make ten thousand individuals
in one town go barefoot.[9]

 "When public needs require it," says representative Isoré, "all
belongs to the people and nothing to individuals."

By virtue of the same right we dispose of persons as we do of things.
We decree the levy en masse and, stranger still, we carry it out, at
least in many parts of the country, and we keep it up for months: in
Vendée, and in the northern and eastern departments, it is the entire
male, able-bodied population, up to fifty years of age, which we drive
in herds against the enemy.[10] We afterwards sign an entire
generation on, all young men between eighteen and twenty-five, almost
a million of men:[11] whoever fails to appear is put in irons for ten
years; he is regarded as a deserter; his property is confiscated, and
his family is punished as well; later he is classed with the
emigrants, condemned to death, and his father, mother and progenitors,
treated as "suspects," imprisoned and their possessions taken.  -- To
clothe, shoe and equip our recruits, we must have workmen; we summon
to head-quarters all gunsmiths, blacksmiths and locksmiths, all the
tailors and shoemakers of the district, "foremen, apprentices and
boys;"[12] we imprison those who do not come ; we install the rest in
squads in public buildings and assign them their tasks ; they are
forbidden to furnish anything to private individuals.  Henceforth,
French shoemakers must work only for us, and each must deliver to us,
under penalty, so many pairs of shoes per decade.[13]  -- But, the
civil service is no less important than the military service, and to
feed the people is as urgent as it is to defend them.  Hence we put
"in requisition all who have anything to do with handling,
transporting or selling provisions and articles of prime
necessity,"[14] especially combustibles and food -- wood-choppers,
carters, raftsmen, millers, reapers, threshers, wine-growers, movers,
field-hands, "country people" of every kind and degree.  Their hands
belong to us: we make them bestir themselves and work under the
penalty of fine and imprisonment.  There shall be no idlers,
especially in crop time: we take the entire population of a commune or
canton into the fields, comprising "the lazy of both sexes;"[15]
willingly or not, they shall do the harvesting under our eyes, banded
together in fields belonging to others as well as in their own, and
they shall put the sheaves indiscriminately into the public granary.

But in labor all hangs together, from the initial undertaking to the
final result, from the raw material to the most finished production,
from the great manufacturer down to the pettiest jobber; grasping the
first link of the chain involves grasping the last one.  The
requisition here again answers the purpose: we apply it to all
pursuits; each is bound to continue his own; the manufacturer to
manufacture, the trader to trade, even to his own detriment, because,
if he works at a loss, the public profits, and every good citizen
ought to prefer public profit to his own profit.[16] In effect, let
his office be what it will, he is an employee of the community;
therefore, the community may not only prescribe task-work to him, but
select his task; it need not consult him in the matter, for he has no
right to refuse.  Hence it is that we appoint or maintain people in
spite of themselves, in the magistracy, in the army and in every other
species of employment.  In vain may they excuse themselves or try get
out of the way; they must remain or become generals, judges, mayors,
national agents, town councilors, commissioners of public welfare or
administration,[17] even against their will.  Too bad for them if the
responsibility is expensive or dangerous, if they have no time for
leisure, if they do not feel themselves qualified for it, if the rank
or services seems to them to lead to a prison or the guillotine; when
they declare that the work is forced labor we reply that they liable
to work for the State.  -- Such is, henceforth, the condition of all
Frenchmen, and likewise of all French women.  We force mothers to take
their daughters to the meetings of popular clubs.  We oblige women to
parade in companies, and march in procession at republican festivals;
we invade the family and select the most beautiful to be draped as
antique goddesses, and publicly promenaded on a chariot; we sometimes
even designate those among the rich who must wed patriots[18]: there
is no reason why marriage, which is the most important of all
services, should not be put in requisition like the others.  --
Accordingly, we enter families, we carry of the child, we subject him
to a civic education.  We are schoolmasters, philanthropists,
theologians, and moralists.  We impose by force our religion and our
ritual, our morality and our social customs.  We lord it over private
lives and consciences; we dictate ideas, we scrutinize and punish
secret inclinations, we tax, imprison and guillotine not only the
evil-disposed, but again "the indifferent, the moderate and the
egoists."[19]  Over and above his visible acts we dictate to the
individual his ideas and his deepest feelings; we prescribe to him his
affections as well as his beliefs, and, according to a preconceived
type, we refashion his intellect, his conscience and his
sensibilities.

III.

The object of the State is the regeneration of man.  - Two sides to
this undertaking.  - Restoration of the Natural man.  - Formation of
the Social man.  - Grandeur of the undertaking.  - To carry it out,
the use of force is a right and a duty.

There is nothing arbitrary in this operation; for the ideal model is
traced beforehand.  If the State is omnipotent, it is for the purpose
of "regenerating Mankind," and the theory which confers its rights, at
the same time assigns to it its object.  In what does this
regeneration of Man consist? - Consider a domestic animal such as a
dog or a horse.  Scrawny, battered, tied up or chained, a thousand are
strained and overworked compared to the few basking in idleness, dying
from rich living; and with all of them, whether fat or lean, the soul
is more spoiled than the body.   A superstitious respect keeps them
cowed under their burden, or makes them cringe before their master.
Servile, slothful, gluttonous, feeble, incapable of resisting
adversity, if they have acquired the miserable skills of slavery, they
have also contracted its needs, weaknesses and vices.  A crust of
absurd habits and perverse inclinations, a sort of artificial and
supplementary being, has covered over their original nature.  -  And,
on the other hand, the better side of their original nature has had no
chance to develop itself, for lack of use.  Separated from the other,
these two parts of its nature have not acquired the sentiment of
community; they do not know, like their brethren of the prairies, how
to help each other and subordinate private interests to the interests
of the flock.  Each pulls his own way, nobody cares for others, all
are egoists; social interests have miscarried.  - Such is Man
nowadays, a disfigured slave that has to be restored.  Our task,
accordingly is two-fold: we have to demolish and we have to construct;
we must first set free the natural Man that we may afterwards build up
the social Man.

It is a vast enterprise and we are conscious of its vastness.

 "It is necessary," says Billaud-Varennes,[20] "that the people to
which one desires to restore their freedom should in some way be
created anew, since old prejudices must be destroyed, old habits
changed, depraved affections improved, superfluous wants restricted,
and inveterate vices extirpated."

But the task is sublime, as the aim is "to fulfill the desires of
nature,[21] accomplish the destinies of humanity, and fulfill the
promises of philosophy".-

"Our purpose," says Robespierre,[22] "is to substitute morality for
egoism, honesty for honor, principles for custom, duties for
etiquette, the empire of reason for the tyranny of fashion, contempt
of vice for indifference to misfortune, pride for arrogance, a noble
mind for vanity, love of glory for the love of profit, good people for
high society, merit for intrigue, genius for intellectual brilliancy,
the charm of contentment for the boredom of voluptuous pleasure, the
majesty of Man for the high-breeding of the great, a magnanimous,
powerful and happy people for an amiable, frivolous and wretched
people, that is to say, every virtue and miracle of the Republic in
the place of the vices and absurdities of the monarchy."

We will do this, the whole of it, whatever the cost.  Little do we
care for the present generation: we are working for generations to
come.

 "Man, forced to isolate himself from society, anchors himself in the
future and presses to his heart a posterity innocent of existing
evils."[23]

 He sacrifices to this work his own and the lives of others.

 "On the day that I am persuaded," writes Saint-Just, "that it is
impossible to render the French people kind, energetic, tender and
relentless against tyranny and injustice, I will stab myself."

- "What I have done in the South I will do in the North," says Baudot;
"I will convert them into patriots; either they or I must die." -

"We will make France a cemetery," says Carrier, "rather than not
regenerate it our own way."

In vain may the ignorant or the vicious protest; they protest because
they are ignorant or vicious.  In vain may the individual plead his
personal rights; he has none: through the social contract, which is
obligatory and solely valid, he has surrendered his entire being;
having made no reservation, "he has nothing to claim." Undoubtedly,
some will grumble, because, with them, the old wrinkle remains and
artificial habits still cover over the original instinct.  Untie the
mill-horse, and he will still go round in the same track; let the
mountebank's dog be turned loose, and he will still raise himself on
his hind-legs; if we would bring them back to their natural gait we
must handle them roughly.  In like manner, to restore Man to his
normal attitude, you must handle him roughly.  But, in this respect,
have no scruples,[24] for we do not bow him down, we raise him up ; as
Rousseau says, "we compel him to be free;" we confer on him the
greatest boon a human being can receive; we bring him back to nature
and to justice.  For this reason, now that he is warned, if he
persists in his resistance, he is a criminal and merits every kind of
chastisements[25], for, he declares himself a rebel and a perjurer,
inimical to humanity, and a traitor to the social compact.

IV.

Two distortions of the natural man.  - Positive religion.  -
Proscription of the orthodox cult.  - Measures against unsworn
priests.  - Measures against the loyal orthodox.  - Destruction of the
constitutional cult.  - Pressure on the sworn priests.  - Churches
closed and ceremonies suppressed.  - Continuation of these
persecutions until the Consulate.

Let us (Taine lets the Jacobin say) begin by figuring to ourselves the
natural man; certainly we of to-day have some difficulty in
recognizing him; he bears but little resemblance to the artificial
being who (in 1789) stands in his shoes, the creature which an
antiquated system of constraint and fraud has deformed, held fast in
his hereditary harness of thralldom and superstition, blinded by his
religion and held in check by prestige, exploited by his government
and tamed by dint of blows, always with a halter on, always put to
work in the wrong way and against nature, whatever stall he may
occupy, high or low, however full or empty his crib may be, now in
menial service like the blinded hack-horse turning the mill-wheel, and
now on parade like a trained dog which, decked with flags, shows off
its antics before the public.[26]  But imagine all these out of the
way, the flags and the bands, the fetters and compartments in the
social stable, and you will see a new man appearing, the original man,
intact and healthy in mind, soul and body.  - In this condition, he is
free of prejudice, he is not ensnared in a net of lies, he is neither
Jew, Protestant nor Catholic; if he tries to imagine the universe as a
whole and the principle of events, he will not let himself be duped by
a pretended revelation; he will listen only to his own reason; he may
chance, now and then, to become an atheist, but, generally, he will
settle down into a deist.  - In this condition of things he is not
fettered by a hierarchy; he is neither noble nor commoner, land-owner
nor tenant, inferior nor superior.  Independent of the others, all are
equal, and, if all agree in the forming of an association, their
common-sense will stipulate that its first article shall secure the
maintenance of this primordial equality.  - Such is man, as nature
made him, as history has unmade him, and as the Revolution is to re-
make him.[27]  One cannot batter away too vigorously against the two
casings that hold him tight, one the positive religion which narrows
and perverts his intellect, and the other the social inequality which
perverts and weakens his will;[28] for, at every effort, some band is
loosened, and, as each band gives way, the paralyzed limbs recover
their action.

Let us trace, (say the Jacobins), the progress of this liberating
operation.  -- Always timid and at loggerheads with the ecclesiastical
organization, the Constituent Assembly could take only half-measures;
it cut into the bark without daring to drive the ax into the solid
trunk.  Its work reduced itself down to the confiscation of clerical
property, to a dissolution of the religious orders, and to a check
upon the authority of the pope; its object was to establish a new
church and transform priests into sworn functionaries of the State,
and this was all.  As if Catholicism, even administrative, would cease
to be Catholicism! As if the noxious tree, once stamped with the
public seal, would cease to be noxious! Instead of the old laboratory
of falsehoods being destroyed another one is officially established
alongside of it, so that there are now two instead of one.  With or
without the official label it operates in every commune in France and,
as in the past, it distributes with impunity its drug to the public.
This is precisely what we, (the Jacobins) cannot tolerate.  - We must,
indeed, keep up appearances, and, as far as words go, we will decree
anew freedom of worship.[29]  But, in fact and in practice, we will
demolish the laboratory and prevent the drug from being sold; there
shall no longer be any Catholic worship in France, no baptism, no
confession, no marriage, no extreme unction, no mass; nobody shall
preach or listen to a sermon; nobody shall administer or receive a
sacrament, save in secret, and with the prospect before him of
imprisonment or the scaffold.  - With this object in mind, we do one
thing at a time.  There is no problem with the Church claiming to be
be orthodox: its members having refused to take the oath are outlaws;
one excludes oneself from an association when one repudiates the pact;
they have lost their qualifications as citizens and have become
ordinary foreigners under the surveillance of the police; and, as they
propagate around them discontent and disobedience, they are not only
foreigners but seditious persons, enemies in disguise, the authors of
a secret and widespread Vendée; it is not necessary for us to
prosecute them as charlatans, it is sufficient to strike them down as
rebels.  As such, we have already banished from France all unsworn
ecclesiastics, about forty thousand priests, and we are deporting
those who did not cross the frontier within the allotted time: we
allow only sexagenarians and the infirm to remain on French soil, and,
again, as prisoners and in seclusion; they incur the penalty of death
if they do not of their own accord report to the prisons of their
country town; the banished who return home incur the penalty of death,
and there is penalty of death against those who shelter priests.[30]
Consequently, in default of an orthodox clergy, there must no longer
be an orthodox worship; the most dangerous of the two manufactories of
superstition is shut down.  That the sale of this poisonous food may
be more surely stopped we punish those who ask for it the same as
those who provide it, and we prosecute not only the pastors, but,
again, the fanatics of the flock; if these are not the authors of the
ecclesiastical rebellion they are its promoters and accomplices.  Now,
thanks to the schism among them, we already know who they are, and, in
each commune, the list is made out.  We style as fanatics all who
reject the ministry of the sworn priests, the bourgeois who calls him
an interloper, all the nuns who do not confess to him, all the
peasants who stay away from his mass, all the old women who do not
kiss his paten, and all the relations of an infant who do not wish him
to baptize it.  All these people and those who associate with them,
whether allied, close relatives, friends, guests or visitors, of
whatever class, either men or women, are seditious at heart, and,
therefore, "suspects." We deprive them of their electoral rights, we
withdraw their pensions, we impose on them special taxation, we
confine them to their dwellings, we imprison them by thousands, and
guillotine them by hundreds; the rest will gradually become
discouraged and abandon an impracticable cult.[31]  - The lukewarm
remain, the sheep-like crowd which holds on to its rites: the
Constituent Assembly will seize them wherever it finds them, and, as
they are the same in the authorized as in the refractory church,
instead of seeking them with the priest who does not submit, it will
seek them with the one who does.  But it will proceed without zeal,
without confidence, often even with distrust, questioning itself
whether these rites, being administered by one who is excommunicated,
are not of doubtful quality.  Such a church is not sound, and we have
only to give it a push to knock it down.  We will do all we can to
discredit constitutional priests: we will prohibit them from wearing
the ecclesiastical costume, and force them by law to bestow the
nuptial benediction on their apostate brethren; we will employ terror
and imprisonment to constrain them to marry; we will given them no
respite until they return to civil life, some admitting themselves to
be impostors, many by surrendering their priestly credentials, and
most of them by resigning their places.[32]  Deprived of leaders by
these voluntary or forced desertions, the Catholic flock will allow
itself to be easily led out of the fold, while, to remove all
temptation to go back, we will tear the enclosure down.  In the
communes in which we are masters we will make the Jacobins of the
place demand the abolition of worship, while, in other communes, we
will get rid of this authoritatively through our missionary
representatives.  We will close the churches, demolish the steeples,
melt down the bells, send all sacred vessels to the Mint, smash the
images of the saints, desecrate relics, prohibit religious burials,
impose the civil burial, prescribe rest during the décadi[33] and
labor on Sundays.  No exception whatever.  Since all positive
religions deal in error, we will outlaw them all: we will exact from
Protestant clergymen a public abjuration; we will not let the Jews
practice their ceremonies; we will have "an 'auto-da-fé,' of all the
books and symbols of the faith of Moses."[34]  But, of all these
various juggling machines, the worst is the Catholic, the most hostile
to nature due to the celibacy of its priesthood, the most opposed to
reason in the absurdity of its dogmas, the most opposed to democracy,
since its powers are delegated from above downwards, the best
protected from civil authority because its head is outside of
France.[35]  Accordingly, we must be most furious against it; even
after Thermidor,[36] we will keep up constant persecution, great and
small; up to the Consulate, we will deport and shoot the priests, we
will revive against fanatics the laws of the Reign of Terror, we will
hamper their movements, we will exhaust their patience; we will keep
them anxious during the day and restless at night; we will not give
them a moment's repose.[37] We will restrict the population to the
decadal cult only; we will change the market-days, so that no believer
shall be able to buy fish on a fast-day.[38] - We have nothing more at
heart than this war against Catholicism; no article on our program
will be carried out with more determination and perseverance.  The
question involved is truth.  We are its guardians, its champions, its
ministers, and never did the servants of truth apply force with such
minute detail and such effect to the extirpation of error.

V.   Equality and Inequality.

Social inequality.  - Malice of the aristocratic race.  - Measures
against the King and Nobles.  - Malice of the aristocracy of wealth.
- Measures against landowners, capitalists and people with incomes.  -
Destruction of large fortunes.  - Measures taken to prevent the large
fortunes in reconstituting themselves.

Next to superstition there is another monster to be destroyed, and,
also here it was the Constituent Assembly that had begun the assault.
But it had also, through lack of courage or of logic, it stopped,
after two or three feeble blows:
* Banning of heraldic insignia, titles of nobility and territorial
names;
* abolition, without indemnity, of all the dues belonging to the
seigneur by right of his former proprietorship over persons;
* abolition of the permission to purchase other feudal rights at a
price agreed upon,
* limitation of royal power.
This was little enough.  When it concerns usurpers and tyrants they
must be treated in another fashion; for their privilege is, of itself,
an outrage on the rights of man.  Consequently,

* we (the Jacobins) have dethroned the King and cut off his head;[39]
* we have suppressed, without indemnity, the entire feudal debt,
comprising the rights vested in the seigneurs by virtue of their being
owners of real-estate, and merely lessors;
* we have abandoned their persons and possessions to the claims and
rancor of local jacqueries;
* we have reduced them to emigration;
* we imprison them if they stay at home;
* we guillotine them if they return.

(As the aristocrats are)Reared in habits of supremacy, and convinced
that they are of a different species from other men, the prejudices of
their race are incorrigible; they are incapable of companionship with
their social equals; we cannot too carefully crush them out, or, at
the very least, hold them firmly down.[40]  Besides, they are guilty
from the fact of having existed; for, they have taken both the lead
and the command without any right to do so, and, in violation of all
right, they have misused mankind; having enjoyed their rank, it is but
just that they should pay for it.  Privileged in reverse, they must be
treated the same as vagabonds were treated under their reign,

* stopped by the police and sent off with their families into the
interior,
*
* crowded into prisons,
*
* executed in a mass, or, at least,
*
* expelled from Paris, the seaports and fortified towns, put on the
limits,
*
* compelled to present themselves daily at the municipality,
*
* deprived of their political rights,
*
* excluded from public offices, "popular clubs, committees of
supervision and from communal and section assemblages."[41]
*
Even this is indulgence; branded with infamy, we ought to class them
with galley-slaves, and set them to work on the public highways.[42]

 "Justice condemns the people's enemies and the partisans of tyranny
to eternal slavery."[43]

But that is not enough, because, apart from the aristocracy of rank,
there are other aristocracies which the Constituent Assembly has left
untouched,[44] especially the aristocracy of wealth.  Of all the
sovereignties, that of the rich man over the poor one is the most
burdensome.  In effect, not only, in contempt of equality, does he
consume more than his share of the common products of labor, and
without producing anything himself, but again, in contempt of liberty,
he may fix wages as he pleases, and, in contempt of humanity, he
always fixes them at the lowest point.  Between himself and the needy
he never makes other than the most unjust contracts.  Sole possessor
of land, capital and the necessities of life, he imposes conditions
which others, deprived of means, are forced to accept at the risk of
starvation; he speculates at his discretion on wants which cannot be
put off, and makes the most of his monopoly by maintaining the poor in
their destitute situations.  That is why, writes Saint Just:[45]

 "Opulence is a disgrace; for every thousand livres expenditure of
this kind a smaller number of natural or adopted children can be
looked after." -

"The richest Frenchman," says Robespierre, "ought not to have now more
three thousand livres rental." -

Beyond what is strictly necessary, no property is legitimate; we have
the right to take the superfluous wherever we find it.  Not only to-
day, because we now require it for the State and for the poor, but at
all times, because the superfluous, in all times, confers on its owner
an advantage in contracts, a control of wages, an arbitrary power over
the means of living, in short, a supremacy of condition worse than
preeminence in rank.  Consequently, our hand is not only against the
nobles, but also against the rich and well-to-do bourgeois[46] the
large land-owners and capitalists; we are going to demolish their
crafty feudalism from top to bottom.[47]  - In the first place, and
merely through the effect of the new institutions, we prevent any
capitalist from deducting, as he is used to do, the best portion of
the fruits of another's labor; the hornets shall no longer, year after
year, consume the honey of the bees.  To bring this about, we have
only to let the assignats (paper money) and their forced rate (of
exchange) work things out.  Through the depreciation of paper-money,
the indolent land-owner or capitalist sees his income melting away in
his hands; his receipts consist only of nominal values.  On the 1st of
January, his tenant pays him really for a half term instead of a full
term; on the 1st of March, his farmer settles his account with a bag
of grain.[48]  The effect is just the same as if we had made fresh
contracts, and reduced by one-half, three-quarters, or, even more, the
rate of interest on loans, the rent of houses and the leases of farm
lands.  - Whilst the revenue of the landlord evaporates, his capital
melts away, and we do the best we can to help this along.  If he has
claims on ancient corporations or civil and religious establishments
of any description, whether provincial governments, congregations,
associations, endowments or hospitals, we withdraw his special
guarantee; we convert his title-deeds into a state annuity, we combine
his private fortune with the public fortune whether he will or not, we
drag him into the universal bankruptcy, toward which we are conducting
all the creditors of the Republic.[49]  - Besides, to ruin him, we
have more direct and prompt means.  If an émigré, and there are
hundreds of thousands of émigrés, we confiscate his possessions.  If
he has been guillotined or deported, and there are tens of thousands
of these, we confiscate his possessions.  If he is "recognized as an
enemy of the Revolution,"[50] and "all the rich pray for the counter-
revolution,"[51] we sequestrate his property, enjoying the usufruct of
it until peace is declared, and we shall have the property after the
war is over.  Usufruct or property, the State, in either case,
inherits; at the most we might grant temporary aid to the family,
which is not even entitled to maintenance.

It is impossible to uproot fortunes more thoroughly.  As to those
which are not at once eradicated we get rid of them piecemeal, and
against these we employ two axes:

On the one hand, we decree the principle of progressive taxation, and
on this basis we establish the forced loan:[52] in incomes, we
distinguish between the essential and the surplus; we fix according as
the excess is greater or less we take a quarter, a third or the half
of it, and, when above nine thousand francs, the whole; beyond its
small alimentary reserve, the most opulent family will keep only four
thousand five hundred francs income.

On the other hand, we cut deep into capital through revolutionary
taxes; our committees and provincial proconsuls levy arbitrarily what
suits them, three hundred, five hundred, up to one million two hundred
thousand francs,[53] on this or that banker, trader, bourgeois or
widow, payable within a week; all the worse for the person taxed if he
or she has no money on hand and is unable to borrow it; we declare
them "suspects," we imprison them, we sequestrate their property and
the State enjoys it in their place.

In any event, even when the amount is paid, we force him or her to
deposit their silver and gold coin in our hands, sometimes with
assignats as security, and often nothing; henceforth, money must
circulate and the precious metals are in requisition;[54] everybody
will deliver up what plate he possesses.  And let nobody presume to
conceal his hoard; all treasure, whether silver-plate, diamonds,
ingots, gold or silver, coined or un-coined, "discovered, or that may
be discovered, buried in the ground or concealed in cellars, inside of
walls or in garrets, under floors, pavements, or hearthstones, or in
chimneys and other hiding places,"[55] becomes the property of the
Republic, with a premium of twenty per cent.  in assignats to the
informer.  -- As, furthermore, we make requisitions for bed-linen,
beds, clothes, provisions, wines and the rests, along with specie and
precious metals, the condition of the mansion may be imagined,
especially after we have lodged in it; it is the same as if the house
had been on fire; all movable property and all real estate have
perished.  - Now that both are destroyed they must not be allowed to
accumulate again.  To ensure this,

1.  we abolish, according to rule, the freedom of bequest,[56]
2.  we prescribe equal and obligatory divisions of all
inheritances;[57]
3.  we include bastards in this under the same title as legitimate
children;
4.  we admit representation à l'infini,[58] "in order to multiply
heirs and parcel out inheritances;"[59]
5.  we reduce the disposable portion to one-tenth, in the direct line,
and one-sixth in a collateral line;
6.  we forbid any gift to persons whose income exceeds one thousand
quintals of grain;
7.  we inaugurate adoption, "an admirable institution," and
essentially republican, "since it brings about a division of large
properties without a crisis."
Already, in the Legislative Assembly a deputy had stated that "equal
rights could be maintained only by a persistent tendency to uniformity
of fortunes."[60]

We have provided for this for the present day and we likewise provide
for it in the future.  - None of the vast tumors which have sucked the
sap of the human plant are to remain; we have cut them away with a few
telling blows, while the steady-moving machine, permanently erected by
us, will shear off their last tendrils should they change to sprout
again.

VI.

Conditions requisite for making a citizen.  - Plans for suppressing
poverty.   Measures in favor of the poor.

In returning Man to his natural condition we have prepared for the
advent of the Social Man.  The object now is to form the citizen, and
this is possible only through a leveling of conditions.  In a well
made society there shall be "neither rich nor poor"[61]: we have
already destroyed the opulence which corrupts; it now remains for us
to suppress the poverty which degrades.  Under the tyranny of material
things, which is as oppressive as the tyranny of men, Man falls below
himself.  Never will a citizen be made out of a poor fellow condemned
to remain valet, hireling or beggar, reduced to thinking only of
himself and his daily bread, asking in vain for work, or, plodding
when he gets it, twelve hours a day at a monotonous pursuit, living
like a beast of burden and dying in a alms-house.[62] He should have
his own bread, his own roof, and all that is indispensable for life;
he must not be overworked, nor suffer anxiety or constraint;

"he must live independently, respect himself, have a tidy wife and
healthy and robust children."[63]

The community should guarantee him comfort, security, the certainty of
not going hungry if he becomes infirm, and, if he dies, of not leaving
his family in want.

 "It is not enough," says Barère,[64] "to bleed the rich, to pull down
colossal fortunes; the slavery of poverty must be banished from the
soil of the Republic.  No more beggars, no more almsgiving, no poor-
houses".

 "The poor and unfortunates," says Saint Just, "are the powerful of
the earth; they have a right to speak as masters to the governments
which neglect them;[65] they have a right to national charity....  In
a democracy under construction, every effort should be made to free
people from having to battle for the bare minimum needed for survival;
by labor if he is fit for work, by education if he is a child, or with
public assistance if he is an invalid or in old age."[66]

 And never had the moment been so favorable.  "Rich in property, the
Republic now expects to use the many millions the rich would have
spent on a counter revolution for the improvement of the conditions of
its less fortunate citizens.  .  .  Those who would assassinate
liberty have made it the richer.  The possessions of conspirators
exist for the benefit of the unfortunate."[67] -- Let the poor take
with a clear conscience: it is not a charity but "an indemnity" which
we provide for them; we save their pride by providing for their
comfort, and we relieve them without humiliating them.

"We leave charity and benevolent works to the monarchies; this
insolent and shabby way of furnishing assistance is fit only for
slaves and masters; we substitute for it a system of national works ,
on a grand scale, over the whole territory of the Republic."[68]

On the other hand, we cause a statement to be drawn up in each
commune, of "the condition of citizens without property," and "of
national possessions not disposed of;" we divide these possession in
small lots; we distribute them "in the shape of national sales" to
poor folks able to work.  We give, "through the form of rental, "an
acre to each head of a family who has less than an acre of his own.
"We thus bind all citizens to the country as well as to property.  We
restore idle and robust arms to the soil, and lost or weakened
families to the workshops in the towns." - As to old and infirm
farmers or craftsmen, also poor mothers, wives and widows of artisans
and farmers, we keep in each department a "big ledger of national
welfare;" we inscribe thereon for every thousand inhabitants, four
farmers, two mechanics, five women, either mothers or widows; each
registered person shall be pensioned by the State, the same as a
maimed soldier; labor-invalids are as respectable as war-invalids.  -
Over and above those who are thus aided on account of poverty, we
relieve and elevate the entire poor class, not alone the thirteen
hundred thousand destitutes counted in France,[69] but, again, all
who, having little or no means on hand, live from day to day on what
they can earn.  We have passed a law[70] by which the public treasury
shall, through a tax on large fortunes, "furnish to each commune or
district the necessary funds for adapting the price of bread to the
rate of wages." Our representatives in the provinces impose on the
wealthy the obligation of "lodging, feeding, and clothing all infirm,
aged, and indigent citizens and orphans of their respective
cantons."[71]  Through the decree on monopolization and the
establishment of the "maximum" we bring within reach of the poor all
objects of prime necessity.  We pay them forty sous a day for
attending district meetings; and three francs a day for serving on
committees of surveillance.  We recruit from amongst them our
revolutionary army;[72] we select amongst them the innumerable
custodians of sequesters: in this way, hundreds of thousands of sans-
culottes enter into the various public services.  - At last, the poor
are taken out of a state of poverty: each will now have his plot of
ground, his salary or pension;

"in a well-ordered republic nobody is without some property."[73]

Henceforth, among individuals, the difference in welfare will be
small; from the maximum to the minimum, there will be only a degree,
while there will be found in every dwelling about the same sort of
household, a plain, simple household, that of the small rural
proprietor, well-off farmer or factory foreman; that of Rousseau at
Montmorency, or that of the Savoyard Vicar, or that of Duplay, the
carpenter, with whom Robespierre lodges.[74] There will be no more
domestic servitude: "only the bond of help and gratitude will exists
between employer and employee."[75] - He who works for another citizen
belongs to his family and sits at his table."[76] - Through the
transformation of lower social classes into middle class conditions we
restore human dignity, and out of the proletarian, the valet and the
workman, we begin to liberate the citizen.

VII.

Repression of Egoism.  - Measures against farmers, manufacturers and
merchants.  - Socialist projects.  - Repression of Federalism.  -
Measures against the local, professional and family spirit.

Two leading obstacles hinder the development of civism, and the first
is egoism.  Whilst the citizen prefers the community to himself, the
egoist prefers himself to the community.  He cares only for his own
interest, he gives no heed to public necessities; he sees none of the
superior rights which take precedence of his derived right; he
supposes that his property is his own without restriction or
condition; he forgets that, if he is allowed to use it, he must not
use it to another's detriment.[77] This even the middle or low class,
who possess goods essential for survival, will do.  The greater the
demand for these goods the higher they raise their prices; soon, they
sell only at an exorbitant rate, and worse still, stop selling and
store their goods or products, in the expectation of selling them
dearer.  In this way, they speculate on another's wants; they augment
the general distress and become public enemies.  Nearly all the
agriculturists, manufacturers and tradesmen of the day, little and
big, are public enemies - farmers, tenant farmers, market-gardeners,
cultivators of every degree, as well as foremen, shopkeepers,
especially wine-dealers, bakers and butchers.

"All merchants are essentially anti-revolutionaries, and would sell
their country to gain a few pennies."[78]

We will not tolerate this legal brigandage.  Since "agriculture has
done nothing for liberty and has sought only its own gain,"[79] we
will put it under surveillance, and, if necessary, under control.
Since "commerce has become a species of miserly tyrant," since "it has
become self-paralyzed," and, "through a sort of anti-revolutionary
contempt, neglected the manufacture, handling and expedition of
diverse materials," we will thwart "the calculations of its barbarous
arithmetic, and purge it of the aristocratic and corrupting
fermentation which oppresses it." We make monopoly "a capital
crime;"[80] we call him a monopolist who "takes food and wares of
prime necessity out of circulation," and "keeps them stored without
daily and publicly offering them for sale." Penalty of death against
whoever, within eight days, does not make a declaration, or if he
makes a false one.  Penalty of death against the dealer who does not
post up the contents of his warehouse, or who does not keep open shop.
Penalty of death against any person who keeps more bread on hand than
he needs for his subsistence.[81] Penalty of death against the
cultivator who does not bring his grain weekly to market.  Penalty of
death against the dealer who does not post up the contents of his
warehouse, or who does not keep open shop.  Penalty of death against
the manufacturer who does not verify the daily use of his workable
material.  - As to prices, we intervene authoritatively between buyer
and seller; we fix the maximum price for all objects which, near or
remotely, serve to feed, warm and clothe man; we will imprison whoever
offers or demands anything more.  Whether the dealer or manufacturer
pays expenses at this rate, matters not; if, after the maximum is
fixed, he closes factory, or gives up business, we declare him a
"suspect;" we chain him down to his pursuit, we oblige him to lose by
it.  - This is the way to clip the claws of beasts of prey, little and
big! But the claws grow out again, and, instead of paring them down,
it would probably be better to pull them out.  Some amongst us have
already thought of that; the right of pre-emption shall be applied to
every article; "in each department, national storehouse might be
established where farmers, land-owners and manufacturers would be
obliged to deposit at a fixed price, paid down, the surplus of their
consumption of every species of merchandise.  The nation would
distribute this merchandise to wholesale dealers, reserving a profit
of six per cent.  The profit of the wholesale dealer would be fixed at
eight per cent and that of the retailer at twelve per cent."[82] In
this way , farmers, manufacturers, and merchants would all become
clerks of the State, appointed on a premium or a discount; unable to
gain a great deal, they would not be tempted to gain too much; they
would cease to be greedy and soon cease to be egoists.[83]  - Since,
fundamentally, egoism is the capital vice and individual
proprietorship the food that nourishes it, why not suppress individual
proprietorship altogether? Our extreme logicians, with Babæuf at the
head of them, go as far as that, and Saint-Just seems to be of that
opinion.[84] We are not concerned with the enacting of an Agrarian;
the nation may reserve the soil to itself and divide among
individuals, not the soil, but its lease.  The outcome of this
principle affords us a glimpse of an order of things in which the
State, sole proprietor of real-estate, sole capitalist, sole
manufacturer, sole trader, having all Frenchmen in its pay and
service, would assign to each one his task according to his aptitude,
and distribute to each one his rations according to his wants.[85] --
These various uncompleted plans still float in a hazy distance but
their common purpose is clearly distinguishable.

 "All which tends to center human passions on the vile, individual ego
must be repudiated or repressed;"[86]

 We should annihilate special interests, deprive the individual of the
motives and means for self-isolation, suppress preoccupations and
ambitions by which Man makes himself a focal point at the expense of
the real center, in short, to detach him from himself in order to
attach him wholly to the State.

This is why, disregarding the narrow egoism through which the
individual prefers himself to the community, we strive towards the
enlarged egoism by which the individual prefers the community to the
group of which he forms a part.  Under no pretext must he separate
himself from the whole, at no price, must he be allowed to form for
himself a small homeland within the large one, for, by the affection
he entertains for the small one, he frustrates the objects of the
large one.  Nothing is worse than political, civil, religious and
domestic federalism; we combat it under all its forms.[87]  In this
particular, the Constituent Assembly has paved the way for us, since
it has broken up all the principal historic or material groups by
which men have separated themselves from the masses and formed a band
apart, provinces, clergy, nobles, parliaments, religious orders and
trades-unions.  We complete its work, we destroy churches, we suppress
literary or scientific associations, educational or benevolent
societies, even down to financial companies.[88] We prohibit any
departmental or commercial "local spirit:" we find

"odious and opposed to all principles, that, amongst municipalities,
some should be rich and others poor, that one should have immense
patrimonial possessions and another nothing but debts."[89]

 We regard these possessions as the nation's, and we place
indebtedness to the nation's account.  We take grain from rich
communes and departments, to feed poor communes and departments.  We
build bridges, roads and canals of each district, at the expense of
the State; "we centralize the labor of the French people in a broad,
opulent fashion."[90]  We want no more local interests, recollections,
dialects, idioms and patriotisms.  Only one bond should subsist
between individuals, that which attaches them to the social body.  We
sunder all others; we do not tolerate any special aggregation; we do
the best we can to break up the most tenacious of all, the family.  -
We therefore give marriage the status of an ordinary contract: we
render this loose and precarious, resembling as much as possible the
free and transient union of the sexes; it shall be dissolved at the
option of both parties, and even of one of the parties, after one
month of formalities and of probation.  If the couple has lived
separate six months; the divorce may be granted without any probation
or delay; divorced parties may re-marry.  On the other hand, we
suppress marital authority: since spouses are equal, each has equal
rights over common property and the property of each other ; we
deprive the husband of its administration and render it "common" to
both parties.  We abolish "paternal authority;"

" it is cheating nature to enforce her rights through constraint.  .
.  .  The only rights that parents have are those of protection and
watchfulness."[91]

The father can no longer control the education of his children; the
State takes charge of it.  The father is no longer master of his
property; that portion he can dispose of by donation or testament is
of the smallest; we prescribe an equal and forced division of
property.  - Finally we preach adoption, we efface bastardy, we confer
on children born of free love, or of a despotic will, the same rights
as those of legitimate children.  In short, we break that sacred
circle, that exclusive group, that aristocratic organization which,
under the name of the family, was created out of pride and egoism.[92]
- Henceforth, affection and obedience will no longer be frittered
away; the miserable supports to which they have clung like ivy vines,
castes, churches, corporations, provinces, communes or families, are
ruined and rooted out; on the ground which is thus leveled, the State
alone remains standing, and it alone offers any point of adhesion; all
these vines are about to twine themselves in on trunk about the great
central column.

VIII.

Indoctrination of mind and intellect.  - Civil religion.- National
education.  -Egalitarian moral standards..- Obligatory civism.  - The
recasting and reduction of human nature to the Jacobin type.

Let not Man go astray, let us lead him on, let us direct minds and
souls, and, to this end, let us enfold him in our doctrines.  He needs
general ideas and the daily experiences flowing out of them; he needs
some theory explaining the origin and nature of things, one which
assigns him his place and the part he has to play in the world, which
teaches him his duties, which regulates his life, which fixes the days
he shall work and the days he shall rest, which stamps itself on his
mind through commemorations, festivals and ceremonies, through a
catechism and a calendar.  Up to this time Religion has been the power
charged with this service, interpreted and served by the Church; now
it is to be Reason, interpreted and served by the State.  - In this
connection, many among us, disciples of the encyclopedists, constitute
Reason a divinity, and honor her with a system of worship; but it is
plain that they personify an abstraction; their improvised goddess is
simply an allegorical phantom; none of them see in her the intelligent
cause of the world; in the depths of their hearts they deny this
Supreme Cause, their pretended religion being merely a show or a sham.
-  We discard atheism, not only because it is false, but again, and
more especially, because it is disintegrating and unwholesome.[93]  We
want an effective, consolatory and fortifying religion, and that
religion is natural religion, which is social as well as true.
"Without this,[94] as Rousseau has said, it is impossible to be a good
citizen...  ...The existence of divinity, the future life, the
sacredness of the social contract and of the laws," all are its
dogmas; "no one may be forced to believe in these, but whoever dares
say that he does not believe in them, sets himself up against the
French people, the human species and nature." Consequently, we decree
that "the French people recognizes the Supreme Being and the
immortality of the soul." - The important thing now is to plant this
entirely philosophic faith in all hearts.  We introduce it into the
civil order of things, we take the calendar out of the hands of the
Church, we purge it of its Christian imagery; we make the new era
begin with the advent of the Republic; we divide the year according to
the metric system, we name the months according to the vicissitudes of
the seasons, "we substitute, in all directions, the realities of
reason for the visions of ignorance, the truths of nature for a
sacerdotal prestige,"[95] the decade for the week, the décadi for
Sundays, lay festivals for ecclesiastical festivals.[96]  On each
décadi, through solemn and appropriate pomp, we impress on the popular
mind one of the highest truths of our creed; we glorify, in the order
of their dates, Nature, Truth, Justice, Liberty, Equality, the People,
Adversity, Humanity, the Republic, Posterity, Glory, Patriotism,
Heroism, and other virtues.  Besides this, we honor the important days
of the Revolution, the taking of the Bastille, the fall of the Throne,
the punishment of the tyrant, the expulsion of the Girondins.  We,
too, have our anniversaries, our relics, the relics of Chalier and
Marat,[97] our processions, our services, our ritual,[98] and the vast
system of visible pageantry by which dogmas are made manifest and
propagated.  But ours, instead of leading men off to an imaginary
heaven, brings them back to a living patrimony, and, through our
ceremonies as well as through our creed, we shall preach public-
spiritedness (civism).

It is important to preach this to adults, it is still more important
to teach it to children: for children are more easily molded than
adults.  Our hold on these still flexible minds is complete, and,
through national education "we seize the coming generations."[99]
Naught is more essential and naught is more legitimate.

"The country," says Robespierre, "has a right to bring up its own
children; it cannot confide this trust to family pride nor to the
prejudices of individuals, the eternal nourishment of aristocracies
and of a domestic federalism which narrows the soul by keeping it
isolated." We are determined to have "education common and equal for
all French people," and "we stamp on it a great character, analogous
to the nature of our government and the sublime doctrines of our
Republic.  The aim is no longer to form gentlemen (messieurs) but
citizens."[100]

We oblige[101] teachers, male and female, to present certificates of
civism, that is to say, of Jacobinism.  We close the school if
"precepts or maxims opposed to revolutionary morality" are taught in
it, that is to say, in conformity with Christian morals.  Children
will learn to read in the Declaration of Rights and in the
Constitution of 1793.  Republican manuals and catechisms will be
prepared for their use.[102] "They must be taught the virtuous traits
which most honor free men, and especially the traits characteristic of
the French Revolution, the best calculated to elevate the soul and
render them worthy of equality and liberty." The 14th of July, 10th of
August, 2nd of September, 21st of January, and 31st of May must be
lauded or justified in their presence.  They must be taken to meetings
of the municipalities, to the law courts,[103] and especially to the
popular clubs; from these pure sources they will derive a knowledge of
their rights, of their duties, of the laws, of republican morality,"
and, on entering society, they will find themselves imbued with all
good maxims.  Over and above their political opinions we shape their
ordinary habits.  We apply on a grand scale the plan of education
drawn out by Jean-Jacques (Rousseau).[104] We want no more literary
prigs; in the army, "the 'dandy' breaks down during the first
campaign;[105] we want young men able to endure privation and fatigue,
toughened, like Emile, "by hard work" and physical exercise.  - We
have, thus far, only sketched out this department of education, but
the agreement amongst the various plans shows the meaning and bearings
of our principle.  "Children generally, without exception, says Le
Peletier de Saint-Fargeau,[106] the boys from five to twelve, the
girls from five to eleven years of age, must be brought up in common
at the expense of the Republic; all, under the sacred law of equality,
are to receive the same clothing, the same food, the same education,
the same attention "in boarding-schools distributed according to
cantons, and containing each from four to six hundred pupils.

"Pupils will be made to submit every day and every moment to the same
rigid rules...  Their beds must be hard, their food healthy, but
simple, their clothing comfortable, but coarse." Servants will not be
allowed; children must help themselves and, besides this, they must
wait on the old and infirm, lodged with or near them.   "Among daily
duties, manual labor will be the principal thing; all the rest will be
accessory." Girls must learn to spin, sew and wash clothes; the boys
will work the roads, be shepherds, ploughmen and work-hands; both will
have tasks set them, either in the school-workshops, or in the fields
and factories in the neighborhood; they will be hired out to
surrounding manufacturers and to the tillers of the soil.  Saint-Just
is more specific and rigid.[107]  "Male children from five to sixteen
years of age, must be raised for their country.  They must be clad in
common cloth at all seasons, and have mats for beds, and sleep eight
hours.  They are to have common food only, fruits, vegetables,
preparations of milk, bread and water.  They must not eat meat before
sixteen .  .  Their education, from ten to sixteen, is to be military
and agricultural.  They will be formed into companies of sixty; six
companies make a battalion; the children of a district form a legion;
they will assemble annually at the district town, encamp there and
drill in infantry tactics, in arenas specially provided for the
purpose; they will also learn cavalry maneuvers and every other
species of military evolution.  In harvest time they are to be
distributed amongst the harvesters." After sixteen, "they enter the
crafts," with some farmer, artisan, merchant or manufacturer, who
becomes their titular "instructor," and with whom they are bound to
remain up to the age of twenty-one, "under the penalty of being
deprived for life of a citizen's rights.[108] .  .  .  All children
will dress alike up to sixteen years of age; from twenty-one to
twenty-five, they will dress as soldiers, if they are not in the
magistracy." - Already we show the effects of the theory by one
striking example; we founded the "Ecole de Mars;"[109] we select out
of each district six boys from sixteen to seventeen and a half years
old "among the children of sans-culottes;" we summon them to Paris,
"to receive there, through a revolutionary education, whatever belongs
to the knowledge and habits of a republican soldier.  They are
schooled in fraternity, in discipline, in frugality, in good habits,
in love of country and in detestation of kings." three or four
thousand young people are lodged at the Sablons, "in a palisaded
enclosure, the intervals of which are guarded by chevaux de frises and
sentinels."[110] We puts them into tents; we feed them with bran
bread, rancid pork, water and vinegar; we drill them in the use of
arms; we march them out on national holidays and stimulate them with
patriotic harangues.  - Suppose all Frenchmen educated in such a
school; the habits they acquire in youth will persist in the adult,
and, in each adult we shall find the sobriety, energy and patriotism
of a Spartan or Roman.

Already, under the pressure of our decrees, civism affects customs,
and there are manifest signs, on all sides, of public regeneration.
"The French people," says Robespierre, "seems to have outstripped the
rest of humanity, by two thousand years; one might be tempted to
regard them, living amongst them, as a different species.  In the rest
of Europe, a ploughman, an artisan, is an animal formed for the
pleasures of a noble; in France, the nobles are trying to transform
themselves into ploughmen and artisans, but do not succeed in
obtaining that honor."[111] Life in all directions is gradually
assuming democratic forms Wealthy prisoners are prohibited from
purchasing delicacies, or procuring special conveniences; they eat
along with the poor prisoners the same ration, at the common
mess[112].  Bakers have orders to make but one quality of bread, the
brown bread called equality bread, and, to obtain his ration, each
person must place himself in line with the rest of the crowd.  On
holidays[113] everybody will bring his provisions down into the street
and eat as one family with his neighbor; on décadi all are to sing and
dance together, pell-mell, in the temple of the Supreme being.  The
decrees of the Convention and the orders of the representatives impose
the republican cockade on women; public opinion and example impose on
men the costume and appearance of sans-culottes we see even dandies
wearing mustaches, long hair, red cap, vest and heavy wooden
shoes.[114] Nobody calls a person Monsieur or Madame; the only titles
allowed are citoyen and citoyenne while thee and Thou is the general
rule.  Rude familiarity takes the place of monarchical politeness; all
greet each other as equals and comrades.[115]  There is now only one
tone, one style, one language; revolutionary forms constitute the
tissue of speech, as well as of written discourse; thought now seems
to consists entirely of our ideas and phrases.[116] All names are
transformed, those of months and of days, those of places and of
monuments, baptismal names and names of families: St.  Denis has
become Franciade; Peter Gaspard is converted into Anaxagoras, and
Antoine-Louis into Brutus; Leroi, the deputy, calls himself Laloi, and
Leroy, the jurist, calls himself August-Tenth.  - By dint of thus
shaping the exterior we reach the interior, and through outward civism
we prepare internal civism.  Both are obligatory, but the latter much
more so than the former; for that is the fundamental principle,[117]
"the incentive which sustains and impels a democratic and popular
government." It is impossible to apply the social contract if
everybody does not scrupulously observe the first clause of it,
namely, the complete surrender of himself to the community; everybody,
then, must give himself up entirely, not only actually but heartily,
and devote himself to the public good, which public good is the
regeneration of Man as we have defined it.  The veritable citizen is
he who thus marches along with us.  With him, as with us, abstract
truths of philosophy control the conscience and govern the will.  He
starts with our articles of faith and follows them out to the end; he
endorses our acts, he recites our creed, he observes our discipline,
he is a believing and practicing Jacobin, an orthodox Jacobin,
unsullied, and without taint of heresy or schism.  Never does he
swerve to the left toward exaggeration, nor to the right toward
toleration; without haste or delay he travels along the narrow, steep
and straight path which we have marked out for him; this is the
pathway of reason, for, as there is but one reason, there is but one
pathway.  Let no one swerve from the line; there are abysses on each
side of it.  Let us follow our guides, men of principles, the pure,
especially Couthon, Saint-Just and Robespierre; they are choice
specimens, all cast in the true mold, and it is this unique and rigid
mold in which all French men are to be recast.
______________________________________________________________________-
Notes:

[1] This and the following text are taken from the "Contrat-Social" by
Rousseau.  Cf.  "The ancient Régime," book III., ch..  IV.

[2] This idea, so universally prevalent and precocious, is uttered by
Mirabeau in the session of the 10th of August, 1789.  (Buchez et Roux,
II., 257.) "I know of but three ways of maintaining one's existence in
society, and these are to be either a beggar, a robber or a hireling.
The proprietor is himself only the first of hirelings.  What we
commonly call his property is nothing more than the pay society awards
him for distributing amongst others that which is entrusted to him to
distribute through his expenses and through what he consumes;
proprietors are the agents, the stewards of the social body."

[3] Report by Roland, January 6, 1793, and by Cambon, February 1,
1793.

[4] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 311.  Report by Saint-Just, Ventôse 8, year
II., and decree in conformity therewith.

[5] Decree of 13 Brumaire, year II.  - Report by Cambon, Feb.  1,
1793.  Cambon estimates the property alone of the order of Malta and
of the colleges at four hundred million livres.

[6] Moniteur, XVIII., 419 and 486.  Reports by Cambon, Brumaire 22 and
Frimaire 1st, year II.  "Let us begin with taking possession of the
leased domains, notwithstanding preceding laws."

[7] Cf.  "The Ancient Régime," p.  14.

[8] Mallet-Dupan, "Mémoires," II., 19.  Moniteur, XVIII., 565.
(Report by Cambon, 11 Frimaire, year II.) Requested to do so by a
popular club of Toulouse, the department of Haute-Garonne has ordered
all possessors of articles in gold or silver to bring them to the
treasuries of their districts to be exchanged for assignats.  This
order has thus far brought into the Toulouse treasury about one
million five hundred thousand or one million six hundred thousand
livres in gold and silver.  The same at Montauban and other places.
"Several of our colleagues have even decreed the death penalty against
whoever did not bring their gold and silver within a given time."

[9] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 106.  (Order by representative
Beauchamp, l'Isle Jourdan, Pluviose 2, year II.) "All blue and green
cloaks in the departments of Haute-Garonne, as well as of the Landes,
Gers and others, are put in requisition from the present day.  Every
citizen possessing blue or green cloaks is required to declare them at
the depot of municipality or other locality where he may chance to
be." If not, he is considered "suspect" is treated as such.  - Ibid.,
AF.II., 92 (Order issued by Taillefer, Brumaire 3, year II., at
Villefranche-l'Aveyron).  - De Martel, "Etude sur Fouché," 368.
(Order by Fouché, Collot d'Herbois and Delaporte: Lyons, Brumaire 21,
year II.) - Moniteur, XVIII., 384.  (Session of 19th Brumaire.  Letter
of Barras and Fréron, dated at Marseilles.) - Moniteur XVIII., 513
(Orders by Lebon and Saint-Just, at Strasbourg, Brumaire 24 and 25,
year II.) Letter of Isoré to the minister Bouchotte, November 4, 1793.
(Legros, "La Revolution telle qu'elle est.") The principle of these
measures was laid down by Robespierre in his speech on property (April
24, 1793), and in his declaration of rights unanimously adopted by the
Jacobin Club (Buchez et Roux, XXVI., 93 and 130).

[10] Rousset, "Les Volontaires," p.  234 and 254.

[11] Report by Cambon, Pluviose 3, year III., p.3.  "One fifth of the
active population is employed in the common defense." - Decree of May
12, and Aug.  23, 1793.  - Decree of November 22, 1793.  - Order of
the Directory, October 18, 1798.

[12] Moniteur, XIX., 631.  Decree of Ventôse 14, year II.  Archives
Nationales, D.SI., 10.  (Orders by representatives Delacroix, Louchet
and Legendre; Pont-Audemer, Frimaire 14, year II.) - Moniteur, XVIII,
622.  - (Decree of Frimaire 18, year II.)

[13] Lenin must have read Taine's text during his long studious stay
in Paris.  He and Stalin did, in any case try to let the USSR function
in accordance with such central allocated planning.  (SR.)

[14] Decree of 15-18 Floréal, year II.  Decree of September 29, 1793,
(in which forty objects of prime necessity are enumerated.  - Article
9 decrees three days imprisonment against workmen and manufacturers
who "without legitimate reason, shall refuse to do their ordinary
task." - Decrees of September 16 and 20, 1793, and that of September
11, articles 16,19, 20 and 21.

[15] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., III.  Order of the representative
Ferry; Bourges, 23 Messidor, year II.  - Ibid., AF.  II., 106.  Order
of the representative Dartigoyte, Auch, Prairial 18, year II.

[16] Decree of Brumaire 11, year II., article 7.

[17] Gouvion Saint Cyr, "Mémoires sur les campagnes de 1792 à la paix
de Campo-Formio," I., 91-109: "Promotion, which every one feared at
this time." .  .  .  Ibid.  229.  "Men who had any resources
obstinately held aloof from any kind of advancement." Archives
Nationales, DS.  I, 5.  (Mission of representative Albert in L'Aube
and La Marne, and especially the order issued by Albert, Chalons,
Germinal 7, year III., with the numerous petitions of judges and town
officers soliciting their removal.  - Letter of the painter Gosse
(published in Le Temps, May 31, 1872), which is very curious, showing
the trials of those in private life during the Revolution: "My father
was appointed charity commissioner and quartermaster for the troops;
at the time of the Reign of Terror it would have been imprudent to
have refused any office" - Archives Nationales, F7, 3485.  The case of
Girard Toussaint, notary at Paris, who "fell under the sword of the
law, Thermidor 9, year II." This Girard, who was very liberal early in
the revolution, was president of his section in 1789, but, after the
10th of August, he had kept quiet.  The committee of the section of
the "Amis de la Patrie," "considering that citizen Girard .  .  .  .
came forward only at the time when the court and Lafayette prevailed
against the sans-culottes;" that, "since equality was established by
the Revolution he has deprived his fellow citizens of his knowledge,
which, in a revolution, is criminal, unanimously agree that the said
citizen is "suspect" and order "him to be sent to the Luxembourg."

[18] Ludovic Sciout, "Histoire de la Constitution civile du clergé,"
IV., 131, 135.  (Orders issued by Dartigoyte and de Pinet).  -
"Recueil de pieces authentiques serrant à l'histoire de la révolution
à Strasbourg." Vol.  I.  p.  230.  (Speech by Schneider at Barr, for
marrying the patriot Funck.) Schneider, it appears, did still better
on his own account.  (Ibid., 317).

[19] Buchez et Roux, XXIX., 160.  (Report of Saint-Just, October 20,
1793.) "You have to punish not only traitors, but even the
indifferent; you must punish all in the Republic who are passive and
do nothing for it."

[20] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 338.  Report of the Convention on the
theory of democratic government, by Billaud-Varennes (April 20, 1794).

[21] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 270.  Report by Robespierre, on the
principles which should guide the National Convention in the internal
administration of the Republic, February 5, 1794.- Cf.  "The ancient
Régime," 227-230, the ideas of Rousseau, of which those of Robespierre
are simply a recast.

[22] Ibid., 270.  - The pretension of reforming men's sentiments is
found in all the programs.  Ibid., 305.  (Report of Saint-Just,
February 26, 1794.) "Our object is to create an order of things
establishing a universal inclination toward the good, and to have
factions immediately hurled upon the scaffold." Ibid., 337.  (Report
of Saint-Just, March 13, 1794." - Ibid., 337.  (Report of Saint-Just,
March 13, 1794.) "We see but one way of arresting the evil, and that
is to convert the revolution into a civil power and wage war on every
species of perversity, as designedly created amongst us for the
enervation of the republic."

[23] Ibid., XXXV., 276.  (Institutions, by Saint-Just.  - Ibid., 287.)
- Moniteur, XVIII., 343.  Meeting of the Jacobin Club, Brumaire 13,
year II., speech by Baudot.

[24] Buchez et Roux, XXIX, 142.  (Speech by Jean Bon St.  André in the
Convention, Sep.  25, 1793.) "We are said to exercise arbitrary power,
we are charged with being despots.  We, despots! .  .  .  Ah, no
doubt, if despotism is to secure the triumph of liberty, such a
despotism is political regeneration." (Applause.) - Ibid, XXXI., 276.
(Report by Robespierre, Pluviose 17, year, II.) "It has been said that
terror is the incentive of despotic government.  Does yours, then,
resemble despotism? Yes, as the sword which flashes in the hands of
the heroes of liberty, resembles that with which the satellites of
tyranny are armed.....  The government of the Revolution is the
despotism of freedom against tyranny."

[25] Ibid., XXXII, 353.  Decree of April 1791.  "The Convention
declares, that, supported by the virtues of the French people, it will
insure the triumph of the democratic revolution and show no pity in
punishing its enemies."

[26] In the following portrayal of the ancient régime, the bombast and
credulity of the day overflows in the most extravagant exaggerations
(Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 300, Report, by Saint-Just, February 26,
1794.): "In 1788, Louis XVI.  Caused eight thousand persons of both
sexes and of every age to be sacrificed in the rue Meslay and on the
Pont-Neuf.  These scenes were repeated by the court on the Champs de
Mars; the court had hangings in the prisons, and the bodies of the
drowned found in the Seine were its victims.  These were four hundred
thousand prisoners in confinement; fifteen thousand smugglers were
hung in a year, and three thousand men were broken on the wheel; there
were more prisoners in Paris than there are now .  .  .  Look at
Europe.  There are four millions of people shut up in Europe whose
shrieks are never heard." - Ibid., XXIV., 132.  (Speech by
Robespierre, May 10, 1793).  "Up to this time the art of governing has
simply consisted in the art of stripping and subduing the masses for
the benefit of the few, and legislation, the mode of reducing these
outrages to a system."

[27] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 353.  (Report by Robespierre to the
Convention, May 7, 1794.) "Nature tells us that man is born for
freedom while the experience of man for centuries shows him a slave.
His rights are written in his heart and history records his
humiliation."

[28] Ibid., 372.  "Priests are to morality what charlatans are to
medical practice.  How different is the God of nature from the God of
the priests! I know of nothing which is so much like atheism as the
religions they have manufactured." Already, in the Constituent
Assembly, Robespierre wanted to prevent the father from endowing a
child.  "You have done nothing for liberty if yours laws do not tend
to diminish by mild and effective means the inequality of fortunes."
(Hamel, I., 403.)

[29] Decree of Frimaire 18, year II.  - Note the restrictions: "The
convention, in the foregoing arrangement, has no idea of derogating
from any law or precaution for public safety against refractory or
turbulent priests, or against those who might attempt to abuse the
pretext of religion in order to compromise the cause of liberty.  Nor
does it mean to disapprove of what has thus far been done by virtue of
the ordinances of representatives of the people, nor to furnish
anybody with a pretext for unsettling patriotism and relaxing the
energy of public spirit."

[30] Decrees of May 27, and August 26, 1792, March 18, April 21 and
October 20, 1793, April 11, and May 11, 1794.  - Add (Moniteur, XIX.,
697) the decree providing for the confiscation of the possessions of
ecclesiastics "who have voluntarily left or been so reported, who are
retired as old or inform, or who have preferred transportation to
retirement." - Ibid., XVIII., 492, (session of Frimaire 2).  A speech
by Forester.  "As to the priesthood, its continuation has become a
disgrace and even a crime." - Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 36.  (An
order by Lequinio, representative of the people of Charante-Inférieur,
la Vendée and Deux-Sèvres, Saintes, Nivose 1, year II.) "In order that
freedom of worship may exist in full plenitude it is forbidden to all
whom it may concern to preach or write in favor of any form of worship
or religious opinion whatsoever." And especially "it is expressly
forbidden to any former minister, belonging to any religious sect
whatever, to preach, write or teach morality under penalty of being
regarded as a suspect and, as such, immediately put under arrest.  .
.  .  Every man who undertakes to preach any religious precepts
whatsoever is, by that fact, culpable before the people.  He violates
.  .  .  social equality, which does not permit the individual to
publicly raise his ideal pretensions above those of his neighbor."

[31] Ludofic Sciout, "Histoire de la Constitution Civile du clergé,"
vols.  III.  and IV., passim.  - Jules Sauzay, "Histoire de la
persécution révolutionaire dans le Doubs," vols.  III., IV., V., and
VI., particularly the list, at the end of the work, of those deported,
guillotined, sent into the interior and imprisoned.

[32] Order of the day of the Convention September 17, 1792; circular
of the Executive Council, January 22, 1793; decrees of the Convention,
July 19, August 12, September 17, November 15, 1793.  - Moniteur,
October, and November, 1793, passim.  (November 23, Order of the Paris
Commune, closing the churches.) - In relation to the terror the
constitutional priests were under, I merely give the following
extracts (Archives Nationales, F7,31167): "Citizen Pontard, bishop of
the department of Dordogne, lodging in the house of citizen Bourbon,
No.  66 faubourg Saint-Honoré, on being informed that there was an
article in a newspaper called "le Republican" stating that a meeting
of priests had been held in the said house, declares that he had no
knowledge of it; that all the officers in charge of the apartments are
in harmony with the Revolution; that, if he had had occasion to
suspect such a circumstance, he would have move out immediately, and
that if any motive can possibly be detected in such a report it is his
proposed marriage with the niece of citizen Caminade, an excellent
patriot and captain of the 9th company of the Champs-Elysées section,
a marriage which puts an end to fanaticism in his department, unless
this be done by the ordination of a priest à la sans-culotte which he
had done yesterday in the chapel, another act in harmony with the
Revolution.  It is well to add, perhaps, that one of his curés now in
Paris has called on him, and that he came to request him to second his
marriage.  The name of the said curé is Greffier Sauvage; he is still
in Paris, and is preparing to be married the same time as himself.
Aside from these motives, which may have given rise to some talk,
citizen Pontard sees no cause whatever for suspicion.  Besides, so
thoroughly patriotic as he, he asks nothing better than to know the
truth, in order to march along unhesitatingly in the revolutionary
path.  He sighs his declaration, promising to support the Revolution
on all occasions, by his writings as well as by his conduct.  He
presents the two numbers of his journal which he has had printed in
Paris in support of the principles he adheres to.  At Paris, September
7, 1793, year II.  Of the Republic, one and indivisible.  F.  Pontard,
bishop of the Republic in the department of Dordogne." - Dauban La
Demagogie en 1793, p.  557.  Arrest of representative Osselin, letter
his brother, curé of Saint-Aubin, to the committee of section Mutius
Scvola, Brumaire 20, year II.,"Like Brutus and Mutius Scvola, I
trample on the feelings with which I idolised my brother! O, truth,
thou divinity of republicans, thou knowest the incorruptibility of may
intentions!" (and so on for fifty-three lines).  "These are my
sentiments, I am fraternally, Osselin, minister of worship at Saint-
Aubin." - P.S.  "It was just as I was going to answer a call of nature
that I learned this afflicting news." (He keeps up this bombast until
words fail him, and finally, frightened to death, and his brain
exhausted, he gives this postscript to show that he was not an
accomplice.)

[33] A term denoting the substitution of ten instead of seven days as
a division of time in the calendar, and forced into use during the
Revolution.

[34] "Recuil de pieces authentiques servant à l'histoire de la
revolutionà Strasbourg," II., 299.  (A district order.)

[35] Later, when Lenin and Stalin resurrected Jacobinism, they placed
the headquarters of any subversive movement outside the country where
it operated.  (SR.)

[36] Thermidor refers to the a very important day and event during the
French Revolution: the day Robespierre fell: Thermidor 9, year II,
(July 27, 1794), Robespierre's fall, effective the 10, was prepared by
his adversaries, Tallien, Barras, Fouché etc., essentially because
they feared for their lives.  Robespierre and 21 of his followers were
executed on the evening of the 10th of Thermidor year II.  (SR.).

[37] Ludovic Sciout, IV., 426.  (Instructions sent by the Directory to
the National Commissions, Frimaire, year II.) - Ibid., ch.  X.  to
XVIII.

[38] Ibid., IV., 688.An order of the Director, Germinal 14, year VI.
- "The municipal governments will designate special days in each
decade for market days in their respective districts, and not allow,
in any case, their ordinance to be set aside on the plea that the said
market days would fall on a holiday.  They will specially strive to
break up all connection between the sales of fish and days of fasting
designated on the old calendar.  Every person exposing food or wares
on sale in the markets on days other than those fixed by the municipal
government will be prosecuted in the police court for obstructing a
public thoroughfare." - The Thermidorians remain equally as anti-
Catholic as their predecessors; only, they disavow open persecution
and rely on slow pressure.  (Moniteur, XIII., 523.  Speech by Boissy
d'Anglas, Ventôse 3, year II.) "Keep an eye on what you cannot hinder;
regulate what you cannot prohibit.  .  .  .  It will not be long
before these absurd dogmas, the offspring of fear and error, whose
influence on the human mind has been so steadily destructive, will be
known only to be despised.  .  .  .  It will not be long before the
religion of Socrates, of Marcus Aurelius and Cicero will be the
religion of the whole world."

[39] Moniteur, XVI., 646.  (The King's trial.) Speech by Robespierre:
"the right of punishing the tyrant and of dethroning him is one and
the same thing." - Speech by Saint-Just: "Royalty is an eternal crime,
against which every man has the right of taking up arms .  .  .  To
reign innocently is impossible!"

[40] Epigraph of Marat's journal: Ute readapt miseries, abet Fortuna
superb is.

[41] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 323.  (Report of Saint-Just, Germinal 21,
year II., and a decree of Germinal 26-29, Art.  4, 13, 15.) - Ibid.,
315.

[42] Buchez et Roux, (Report of Saint-Just, October 10, 1793.) "That
would be the only good they could do their country.  .  .  .  It would
be no more than just for the people to reign over its oppressors in
its turn, and that their pride should be bathed in the sweat of their
brows."

[43] Ibid., XXXI., 309.  (Report of Saint-Just, Ventôse 8, year II.)

[44] Ibid., XXVI.  435.  (Speech by Robespierre on the constitution,
May 10, 1793.) "What were our usages and pretended laws other than a
code of impertinence and baseness, where contempt of men was subject
to a sort of tariff, and graduated according to regulations as odd as
they were numerous? To despise and be despised, to cringe in order to
rule, slaves and tyrants in turn, now kneeling before a master, now
trampling the people under foot - such was the ambition of all of us,
so long as we were men of birth or well educated men, whether common
folks or fashionable folks, lawyers or financiers, pettifoggers or
wearing swords." - Archives Nationales, F7, 31167.  (Report of the
observatory Chaumont, Nivôse 10, year II.) - "Boolean's effigy, placed
in the college of Lisle, has been lowered to the statues of the
saints, the latter being taken out of their niches.  There is now no
kind of distinction.  Saints and authors are of the same class."

[45] Buchez et Roux., 296.  ("Institutions" by Saint-Just.) - Meillan,
"Mémoires," p.  17.  - Anne Plumptre, "A narrative of three years'
residence in France, from 1802 to 1805," II., 96.  At Marseilles: "The
two great crimes charged on those who doomed to destruction, were here
as elsewhere, wealth and aristocracy.  .  .  It had been decreed by
the Terrorists that no person could have occasion for more than two
hundred livres a year, and that no income should be permitted to
exceed that sum."

[46] Archives Nationales, F7, 4437.  (Address of the people's club of
Caisson (Gard), Messidor 7, year II.) "The Bourgeoisie, the
merchants, the large land-owners have all the pretension of the ex-
nobles.  The law provides no means for opening the eyes of the common
people in relation to these new tyrants.  The club desires that the
revolutionary tribunal should be empowered to condemn this proud class
of individuals to a prompt partial confinement.  The people would then
see that they had committed a misdemeanor and would withdraw that sort
of respect in which they hold them." A note in the hand-writing of
Couthon: "Left to the decision of popular commissions."

[47] Gouvernor Morris, in a letter of January 4, 1796, says that
French capitalists have been financially ruined by assignats, and
physically by the guillotine.  - Buchez et Roux, XXX., 26.  (Notes
written by Robespierre in June, 1793.) "Internal dangers come from the
bourgeois.  .  .  who are our enemies? The vicious and the rich."

[48] Narrative by M. Sylvester de Sacy (May 23, 1873): His father
owned a farm bringing in four thousand francs per annum; the farmer
offered him four thousand francs in assignats or a hog; M. de Sacy
took the hog.

[49] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 441.  (Report by Cambon on the institution
of the grand livre of public debt, August 15, 1793.)

[50] Ibid., XXXI., 311.  Report by Saint-Just, February 26, 1794, and
decree in accordance therewith, unanimously adopted.  See, in
particular, article 2.  - Moniteur, 12 Ventôse, year II.  (meeting of
the Jacobin club, speech by Collot d'Herbois).  "The Convention has
declared that prisoners must prove that they were patriots from the
1st of May 1789.  When the patriots and enemies of the Revolution
shall be fully known, then the property of the former shall be
inviolable and held sacred, while that of the latter will be
confiscated for the benefit of the republic."

[51] Buchez et Roux, XXVI., 455 (Session of the Jacobin Club, May 10,
1793, speech by Robespierre.) - Ibid., (Report by Saint-Just, Feb.
26, 1794.) "He who has shown himself an enemy of his country cannot be
one of its proprietors.  Only he has patrimonial rights who has helped
to free it."

[52] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 93 and 130.  (Speech by Robespierre on
property, and the declaration of rights adopted by the Jacobin club.)
Decree of Sept.  3, 1793 (articles 13 and 14).

[53] Moniteur, XXII., 719.  (Report by Cambon, Frimaire 6, year III.)
At Bordeaux Raba has been sentenced to pay a fine of 1,200,000 francs,
Pechotte to pay 500,000 francs, Martin-Martin to 300,000 francs." -
Cf.  Rodolphe Reuss, "Séligmann Alexandre ou les Tribulations d'un
israélite de Strasbourg."

[54] Ibid., XVIII., 486.  (Report by Cambon, Frimaire 1, year II.)
"The egotists who, some time ago, found it difficult to pay for the
national domains they had acquired from the Republic, even in
assignats, now bring us their gold .  .  .  Collectors of the revenue
who had buried their gold have come and offered to pay what they owe
the nation in ingots of gold and silver.  These have been refused, the
Assembly having decreed the confiscation of these objects."

[55] Decree of Brumaire 23, year II.  On taxes and confiscations in
the provinces see M. de Martel, "Etude sur Fouché et Pieces
authentiques servant à l'histoire de la revolution à Strasbourg." And
further on the details of this operation at Troyes.  - Meillan, 90:
"At Bordeaux, merchants were heavily taxed, not on account of their
incivism, but on account of their wealth."

[56] Decree of March 7-11, 1793.

[57] Moniteur, XVIII., 274, decrees of Brumaire 4, and ibid, 305,
decree of Brumaire 9, year II., establishing equal partition of
inheritances with retroactive effect to July 14, 1789.  Adulterous
bastards are excepted.  The reporter of the bill, Cambacèrés, laments
this regrettable exception.

[58] Rights of inheritance allowed to the descendants of a deceased
person who never enjoyed these rights, but who might have enjoyed them
had he been living when they fell to him.  - Tr.

[59] Fenet, "Travaux du Code civil." (Report by Cambacèrés on the Code
civil, August 9, 1793).  The spokesman for the committee that had
framed the bill makes excuses for not having deprived the father of
all the disposable portion.  "The committee believed that such a
clause would seriously violate our customs without being of any
benefit to society or of any moral advantage.  We assured ourselves,
moreover, that there should always be a division of property." With
respect to donations: "It is repugnant to all ideas of beneficence to
allow donations to the rich.  Nature is averse to the making of such
gifts so long as our eyes dwell on misery and misfortune.  These
affecting considerations have determined us to fix a point, a sort of
maximum, which prohibits gifts on the part of those who have reached
that point."

[60] Moniteur, XII., 730, (June 22, 1792), speech by Lamarque.  - But
this principle is encountered everywhere.  "Equality, indeed, (is) the
final aim of social art." (Condorcet, 'Tableau des progrès de l'esprit
humain," II., 59.  - "We desired," writes Baudot, "to apply to
politics the equality which the Gospel awards to Christians." (Quinet,
"Revolution Française, II., 407.)

[61] Buchez et Roux, XXXV, 296 (The words of Saint-Just.) - Moniteur,
XVIII, 505 (Ordinance of the Paris Commune, Frimaire 3, year II).
"Wealth and Poverty must alike disappear under the régime of
equality."

[62] Ib.  XXXV, 296 ("Institutions" by Saint-Just).  "A man is not
made for trades, nor for a workhouse nor for an alms-house; all this
is frightful." - Ibid., XXXI., 312.  (Report of Saint-Just, Ventôse 8,
year II.) "Let all Europe see that you will not allow a miserable man
on French territory! .  .  .  Happiness is a new idea in Europe."

[63] Ib.  XXXV, 296 ("Institutions" by Saint-Just.)

[64] Moniteur, XX, 444 ( Report by Barère, Floreal 22, year II).
"Mendicity is incompatible with popular government."

[65] Ib., XIX., 568.  (Report by Saint-Just, Ventôse 8, year II.)

[66] Ib., XX, 448 (Rapport by Barère, Floreal 22).

[67] Ibid., XIX., 568.  (Report by Saint-Just, Ventôse 8, and decree
of Ventôse 13.) "The Committee of Public Safety will report on the
means of indemnifying the unfortunate with property belonging to the
enemies of the Revolution."

[68] Ibid., XIX., 484.  (Report by Barère, Ventôse 21, year II.) -
Ibid., XX., 445.  (Report by Barère, Floréal 22, year II.) - Decrees
on public assistance, June 28, 1793, July 25, 1793, Frimaire 2, and
Floréal 22, year II.) - this principle, moreover, was set forth in the
Constitution of 1793.  "Public help is a sacred obligation; society
owes a subsistence to unfortunate citizens, whether by providing work
for them, or by ensuring the means of existence to those who are not
in a condition to work." - Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 39.  The
character of this measure is very clearly expressed in the following
circular of the Committee of Public Safety to its representatives on
mission in the departments, Ventôse, year II.  "A summary act was
necessary to put the aristocracy down.  The national Convention has
struck the blow.  Virtuous indigence had to recover the property which
crime had encroached upon.  The national Convention has proclaimed its
rights.  A general list of all prisoners should be sent to the
Committee of General Security, charged with deciding on their fate.
The Committee of Public Safety will receive the statement of the
indigent in each commune so as to regulate what is due to them.  Both
these proceedings demand the utmost dispatch and should go together.
It is necessary that terror and justice be brought to bear on all
points at once.  The Revolution is the work of the people and it is
time they should have the benefit of it."

[69] Moniteur, XX., 449.  (Report by Barère, Floréal 22, year II.)

[70] Decree of April 2-5, 1793.

[71] Moniteur, XVIII., 505.  (Orders of Fouché and Collet d'Herbois,
dated at Lyons and communicated to the commune of Paris, Frimaire 3,
year II.) - De Martel, "Etude sur Fouché," 132.  Orders of Fouché on
his mission in the Nievre, Sept.  19, 1793.  "There shall be
established in each district town a Committee of Philanthropy,
authorized to levy on the rich a tax proportionate to the number of
the indigent."

[72] Decree of April 2-5, 1793.  "There shall be organized in each
large commune a guard of citizens selected from the least fortunate.
These citizens shall be armed and paid at the expense of the
Republic."

[73] Moniteur, XX., 449.  (Report of Barère, Floréal 22, year II.)

[74] Ibid., XIX., 689.  (Report by Saint-Just, Ventôse 23, year II.)
"We spoke of happiness.  It is not the happiness of Persepolis we
have offered to you.  It is that of Sparta or Athens in their best
days, the happiness of virtue, that of comfort and moderation, the
happiness which springs from the enjoyment of the necessary without
the superfluous, the luxury of a cabin and of a field fertilized by
your own hands. A cart, a thatched roof affording shelter from the
frosts, a family safe from the lubricity of a robber - such is happiness!"

[75] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 402.  (Constitution of 1793.)

[76] Ibid.  XXXV., 310.  ("Institutions", by Saint-Just.)

[77] Ibid., XXVI., 93 and 131.  (Speech by Robespierre on property,
April 24, 1793, and declaration of rights adopted by the Jacobin
Club.) - Mallet-Dupan, "Mémoires," I., 401.  (Address of a deputation
from Gard.) "Material wealth is no more the special property of any
one member of the social body than base metal stamped as a circulating
medium."

[78] Moniteur, VIII., 452.  (Speech by Hébert in the Jacobin Club,
Brumaire 26, year II.) "Un Séjour en France de 1792 à 1795," p.218.
(Amiens, Oct.  4, 1794.) "While waiting this morning at a shop door I
overheard a beggar bargaining for a slice of pumpkin.  Unable to agree
on the price with the woman who kept the shop he pronounced her
'corrupted with aristocracy.' 'I defy you to prove it!' she replied.
But, as she spoke, she turned pale and added, 'Your civism is beyond
all question - but take your pumpkin.' 'Ah,' returned the beggar,
'what a good republican!'"

[79] Ibid., XVIII., 320.  (Meeting of Brumaire 11, year II.  Report by
Barère.) - Meillan, 17.  Already, before the 31st May: "The tribune
resounded with charges against monopoly, every man being a monopolist
who was not reduced to living on daily wages or on alms."

[80] Decrees of July 26, 1793, Sept.  11 and 29; Brumaire 11, and
Ventôse 6, year II.

[81] Moniteur, XVIII., 359.  "Brumaire 16, year II.  Sentence of death
of Pierre Gourdier, thirty-six years of age, stock-broker, resident in
Paris, rue Bellefond, convicted of having monopolized and concealed in
his house a large quantity of bread, in order to bread scarcity in the
midst of abundance." He had gastritis and could eat nothing but panada
made with toast, and the baker who furnished this gave him thirty
pieces at a time (Wallon, II., 155).

[82] Journal of the debates of the Jacobin Club, No.  532, Brumaire
20, year II.  (Plan of citizen Dupré, presented in the Convention by a
deputation of the Arcis Club.) - Dauban, "Paris en 1794," p.  483 (a
project similar to the former, presented to the Committee of Public
Safety by the Jacobin Club of Montereau, Thermidor, year II.)

[83] These proposals should come to haunt western civilization for a
long time.  (SR.)

[84] Buchez et Roux, XXXV., 272.  ("Institutions," by Saint-Just.)

[85] These ideas were still powerful even before Taine wrote these
words in 1882.  The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations cites a
declaration made by 47 anarchists on trial after their uprising in
Lyons in 1870: "We wish, in a word, equality - equality in fact as
corollary, or rather, as primordial condition of liberty.  From each
according to his faculties, to each according to his needs; that is
what we wish sincerely and energetically."

[86] Buchez et Roux, XXXI, 273, (Report by Robespierre, Pluviôse17,
year II.  (7 Feb.  1794).

[87] Moniteur, XIX (Rapport by Barère, Ventôse 21, an II).  "You
should detect and combat federalism in all your institutions, as your
natural enemy....A grand central establishment for all the work of the
Republic is an effective means against federalism." - Buchez et Roux,
XXXI, 351, et XXXII, 316 (Rapports by Saint-Just, Ventôse 23 et
Germinal 26, year II).  "Immorality is a federalism in the civil
state...Civil federalism, by isolating all parts of the state, has
dried up abundance."

[88] Decree of Germinal 26-29, year II.  Financial companies are and
hereby remain suppressed.  All bankers, commission merchants, and
other persons, are forbidden to form any establishment of this order
under any pretext or under any denomination."

[89] " Memoires de Carnot," I., 278 (Report by Carnot).  "That is not
family life.  If there are local privileges there will soon be
individual privileges and local aristocracy will bring along in its
train the aristocracy of inhabitants."

[90] Moniteur, XIX., 683 (Rapport by Barère, Ventôse 21, year II).  --
This report should be read in full to comprehend the communistic and
centralizing spirit of the Jacobins.  (Undoubtedly Lenin, during his
years in Paris, had read Taine's footnote and asked the national
library for a copy of this rapport.  SR.)

[91]  Fenet, "Travaux du Code civil," 105 (Rapports by Cambacérès,
August 9, 1793 and September 9, 1794).  - Decrees of September 20,
1793 and Floréal 4, year II (On divorce).  - Cf.  "Institutions," by
Saint-Just (Buchez et Roux, XXXV, 302).  "A man and woman who love
each other are married; if they have no children they may keep their
relationship secret."

[92] This article of the Jacobin program, like the others, has its
practical result.  - "At Paris, in the twenty-seven months after the
promulgation of the law of September, 1792, the courts granted five
thousand nine hundred and ninety-four divorces, and in year VI, the
number of divorces exceeded the marriages." (Glasson, le Mariage civil
et le Divorce, 51.) - "The number of foundlings which, in 1790, in
France, did not exceed twenty-three thousand, is now (year X.) more
than sixty-three thousand.  "Statistique de la Sarthe," by Auvray,
prefect, year, X.) - In the Lot-et-Garonne (Statistique, by Peyre,
préfet, year X ), more than fifteen hundred foundlings are counted:
"this extraordinary number increased during the Revolution through the
too easy admission of foundlings into the asylums, through the
temporary sojourning of soldiers in their homes, through the
disturbance of every moral and religious principle." - "It is not rare
to find children of thirteen and fourteen talking and acting in a way
that would have formerly disgraced a young man of twenty." (Moselle,
Analyse, by Ferrière.) - "The children of workmen are idle and
insubordinate; some indulge in the most shameful conduct against their
parents;" others try stealing and use the coarsest language."
(Meurthe, Statistique, by Marquis, préfet.) - Cf.  Anne Plumptre (A
Narrative of three years' residence in France from 1802 to 1805, I.
436).  "You would not believe it, Madame, said a gardener to her at
Nimes, that during the Revolution we dared not scold our children for
their faults.  Those who called themselves patriots regarded it as
against the fundamental principles of liberty to correct children.
This made them so unruly that, very often, when a parent presumed to
scold its child the latter would tell him to mind his business,
adding, 'we are free and equal, the Republic is our only father and
mother ; if you are not satisfied, I am.  Go where you like it
better.' Children are still saucy.  It will take a good many years to
bring them back to minding.'

[93] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 364 (Report by Robespierre, Floréal 8,
year II.)

[94] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 385 - (Address of a Jacobin deputation to
the Convention, Floréal 27, year II.) - At Bayeux, the young girl who
represented Liberty, had the following inscription on her breast or
back: "Do not make of me an instrument of licentiousness." (Gustave
Flaubert, family souvenirs.)

[95] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 415.  (Report by Fabre d'Eglantine,
October 6, 1793.) - (Grégoire, "Memoires," I., 341.) "The new calendar
was invented by Romme in order to get rid of Sunday.  This was his
object; he admitted it to me."

[96] Ibid., XXXII., 274.  (Report by Robespierre, Floréal 18, year
II.) "National Festivals form an essential part of public
education....  A system of national festivals is the most powerful
means of regeneration."

[97] Ibid., XXXVIII., 335.  Marat's heart, placed on a table in the
Cordéliers Club, was an object of religious reverence.  - (Grégoire,
"Mémoires," I., 341.) "In some schools the pupils were obliged to make
the sign of the cross at the names of Marat, Lazowski, etc."

[98] Comte de Martel, "Étude sur Fouché," 137.  Fête at Nevers, on the
inaguration of a bust of Brutus.  - Ibid., 222, civic festival at
Nevers in honor of valor and morals.  - Dauban, "Paris en 1794."
Programme of the fête of the supreme Being at Sceaux.

[99] An expression by Rabaut Saint-Etienne.

[100] Ibid., XXXII., 373 (Report by Robespierre, Floréal 15, year II.)
- Danton had expressed precisely the same opinion, supported by the
same arguments, at the meeting of Frimaire 22, year II.  (Moniteur,
XVIII, 654.) "Children first belong to the Republic before belonging
to their parents.  Who will assure me that these children, inspired by
parental egoism, will not become dangerous to the Republic? What do we
care for the ideas of an individual alongside of national ideas? ...
Who among us does not know the danger of this constant isolation? It
is in the national schools that the child must suck republican milk!
....  The Republic is one and indivisible.  Public instruction must
likewise relate to this center of unity."

[101] Decree of Vendémaire 30 and Brumaire 7, year II.  - Cf.  Sauzay,
VI., 252, on the application of this decree in the provinces.

[102] Albert Duruy, 2L'Instruction publique et la Revolution,2 164, to
172 (extracts from various republican spelling-books and catechisms).
- Decree of Frimaire 29, year II., section I., art.  I, 83; section
II., art.  2; section III., arts.  6 and 9.

[103] Moniteur, XVIII., 653.  (Meeting of Frimaire 22, speech by
Bouquir, reporter.)

[104] Moniteur, XVIII., 351-359.  (Meeting of Brumaire 15, year II.,
report by Chénier.) "You have made laws - create habits.  .  .  .  You
can apply to the public instruction of the nation the same course that
Rousseau follows in 'Emile.' "

[105] The words of Bouquier, reporter.  (Meeting of Frimaire 22, year
II.)

[106] Buchez et Roux, XXIV, 57 (Plan by Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau,
read by Robespierre at the Convention, July 13, 1793.) - Ibid., 35.
(Draft of a decree by the same hand.)

[107] Ibid., XXX., 229.  ("Institutions," by Saint-Just.)

[108] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 261.  (Meeting of Nivose 17.) On the
committee presenting the final draft of the decrees on public
instruction the Convention adopts the following article: "All boys
who, on leaving the primary schools of instruction, do not devote
themselves to tillage, will be obliged to learn some science, art or
occupation useful to society.  Otherwise, on reaching twenty, they
will be deprived of citizens' rights for ten years, and the same
penalty will be laid on their father, mother, tutor or guardian."

[109] Decree of Prairial 13, year II.

[110] Langlois, "Souvenirs de l'Ecole de Mars."

[111] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 355.  (Report by Robespierre, Floréal
18, year II.)

[112] Moniteur, XVIII., 326.  (Meeting of the Commune, Brumaire 11,
year II.) the commissary announces that, at Fontainebleau and other
places, "he has established the system of equality in the prisons and
places of confinement, where the rich and the poor partake of the same
food." - Ibid., 210.  (Meeting of the Jacobins, Vendémiaire 29, year
II.  Speech by Laplance on his mission to Gers.) "Priests had every
comfort in their secluded retreats; the sans-culottes in the prisons
slept on straw.  The former provided me with mattresses for the
latter." - Ibid., XVIII., 445.  (Meeting of the convention, Brumaire
26, year II.) "The Convention decrees that the food of persons kept in
places of confinement shall be simple and the same for all, the rich
paying for the poor."

[113] Archives Nationales.  (AF.  II., 37, order of Lequinio, Saintes,
Nivose 1, year II.) "Citizens generally in all communes, are requested
to celebrate the day of the decade by a fraternal banquet which,
served without luxury or display .  .  .  will render the man bowed
down with fatique insensible to his forlorn condition; which will fill
the soul of the poor and unfortunate with the sentiment of social
equality and raise man up to the full sense of his dignity; which will
suppress with the rich man the slightest feeling of pride and
extinguish in the public functionary all germs of haughtiness and
aristocracy."

[114] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., ii., 48 (Act of Floréal 25, year
II.) "the Committee of Public Safety request David, representative of
the people, to present his views and plans in relation to modifying
the present national costume, so as to render it appropriate to
republican habits and the character of the Revolution." - Ibid., (Act
of Prairial 5, year II.) for engraving and coloring twenty thousand
impressions of the design for a civil uniform, and six thousand
impressions for the three designs for a military, judicial and
legislative uniform.

[115] An identical change took, strangely enough and as caused by some
hidden force, place in Denmark in the seventies.  (SR.)

[116] This is now the case in the entire Western 'democratic' sphere,
in newspapers, schools, and on television.  (SR.)

[117] Ibid, XXXI., 271.  (Report by Robespierre, Pluviose 1, year II.)
"This sublime principle supposes a preference for public interests
over all private interests; from which it follows that the love of
country supposes again, or produces, all the virtues." "As the essence
of a republic or of democracy is equality, it follows that love of
country necessarily comprises a love of equality." "The soul of the
Republic is virtue, equality." - Lavalette, "Memoirs," I., 254.
(Narrated by Madame Lavalette.) She was compelled to attend public
festivals, and, every month, the patriotic processions.  "I was rudely
treated by my associates, the low women of the quarter; the daughter
of an emigré, of a marquis, or of an imprisoned mother, ought not to
be allowed the honor of their company; ....  it was all wrong that she
was not made an apprentice....  Hortense de Beauharnais was
apprenticed to her mother's seamstress, while Eugene was put with a
carpenter in the Faubourg St.  Germain." The prevailing dogmatism has
a singular effect with simple-minded people.  (Archives Nationals, AF.
II., 135.  petition of Ursule Riesler, servant to citizen Estreich and
arrested along with him, addressed to Garneri, agent of the Committee
of Public Safety.  She begs citizen Garnerin to interest himself in
obtaining her freedom.  She will devote her life to praying to the
Supreme Being for him, since he will redeem her life.  He is to
furnish her, moreover, with the means for espousing a future husband,
a genuine republican, by who she is pregnant, and who would not allow
her to entertain any idea of fanatical capers.




CHAPTER II.

I.

Reactionary concept of the State.  - Analogy between this idea of the
State and that of antiquity.  - Difference between antique and modern
society.  - Changed circumstances.

The Jacobin theory can then be summarized in the following points:

* The speculative creation of a curtailed type of human being.
* An effort to adapt the living man to this type.
* The interference of public authority in every branch of public
endeavor.
* Constraints put upon labor, trade and property, upon the family and
education, upon worship, habits, customs and sentiments.
* The sacrifice of the individual to the community.
* The omnipotence of the State.

No theory could be more reactionary since it moves modern man back to
a type of society which he, eighteen centuries ago, had already passed
through and left behind.

 During the historical era proceeding our own, and especially in the
old Greek or Latin cities, in Rome or Sparta, which the Jacobins take
for their models,[1] human society was shaped after the pattern of an
army or convent.  In a convent as in an army, one idea, absorbing and
unique, predominates:

* The aim of the monk is to please God at any sacrifice.
* The soldier makes every sacrifice to obtain a victory.

Accordingly, each renounces every other desire and entirely abandons
himself, the monk to his rules and the soldier to his drill.  In like
manner, in the antique world, two preoccupations were of supreme
importance.  In the first place, the city had its gods who were both
its founders and protectors: it was therefore obliged to worship these
in the most reverent and particular manner; otherwise, they abandoned
it.  The neglect of any insignificant rite might offend them and ruin
it.  In the second place, there was incessant warfare, and the spoils
of war were atrocious; on a city being taken every citizen might
expect to be killed or maimed, or sold at auction, and see his
children and wife sold to the highest bidder.[2] In short, the antique
city, with its acropolis of temples and its fortified citadel
surrounded by implacable and threatening enemies, resembles for us the
institution of the Knights of St.  John on their rocks at Rhodes or
Malta, a religious and military confraternity encamped around a
church.  - Liberty, under such conditions, is out of the question:
public convictions are too imperious; public danger is too great.
With this pressure upon him, and thus hampered, the individual gives
himself up to the community, which takes full possession of him,
because, to maintain its own existence, it needs the whole man.
Henceforth, no one may develop apart and for himself; no one may act
or think except within fixed lines.  The type of Man is distinctly and
clearly marked out, if not logically at least traditionally; each
life, as well as each portion of each life must conform to this type;
otherwise public security is compromised: any falling off in gymnastic
education weakens the army; passing the images of the gods and
neglecting the usual libation draws down celestial vengeance on the
city.  Consequently, to prevent all deviations, the State, absolute
master, exercises unlimited jurisdiction; no freedom whatever is left
to the individual, no portion of himself is reserved to himself, no
sheltered corner against the strong hand of public force, neither his
possessions, his children, his personality, his opinions or his
conscience.[3] If, on voting days, he shares in the sovereignty, he is
subject all the rest of the year, even to his private sentiments.
Rome, to serve these ends, had two censors.  One of the archons of
Athens was inquisitor of the faith.  Socrates was put to death for not
believing in the gods in which the city believed.[4] - In reality, not
only in Greece and in Rome, but in Egypt, in China, in India, in
Persia, in Judea, in Mexico, in Peru, during the first stages of
civilization,[5] the principle of human communities is still that of
gregarious animals: the individual belongs to his community the same
as the bee to its hive and the ant to its ant-hill; he is simply an
organ within an organism.  Under a variety of structures and in
diverse applications authoritative socialism alone prevails.

Just the opposite in modern society; what was once the rule has now
become the exception; the antique system survives only in temporary
associations, like that of an army, or in special associations, as in
a convent.  Gradually, the individual has liberated himself, and
century after century, he has extended his domain and the two chains
which once bound him fast to the community, have snapped or been
lightened.

In the first place, public power has ceased to consist of a militia
protecting a cult.  In the beginning, through the institution of
Christianity, civil society and religious society have become two
distinct empires, Christ himself having separated the two
jurisdictions;

 "Render unto Csar the things which are Csar's, and unto God the
things that are God's."

Additionally, through the rise of Protestantism, the great Church is
split into numerous sects which, unable to destroy each other, have
been so compelled to live together and the State, even when preferring
one of them, has found it necessary to tolerate the others.  Finally,
through the development of Protestantism, philosophy and the sciences,
speculative beliefs have multiplied.  There are almost as many faiths
now-a-days as there are thinking men, and, as thinking men are
becoming daily more numerous, opinions are daily becoming more
numerous.  So should the State try to impose any one of these on
society, this would excite opposition from an infinity of others;
hence the wisdom in governing is found, first, in remaining neutral,
and, next, in acknowledging that it is not qualified to interfere.

In the second place, war has become less frequent and less destructive
because men have not so many motives for waging it, nor the same
motives to push it to the same extremes.  Formerly, war was the main
source of wealth; through victories Man acquired slaves, subjects and
tributaries; he turned these to the best account; he leisurely enjoyed
their forced labor.  Nothing of this kind is seen now-a-days; people
no longer think of providing themselves human cattle; they have
discovered that, of all animals, these are the most troublesome, the
least productive, and the most dangerous.  Comforts and security are
obtained much more readily through free labor and machinery; the great
object no is not to conquer, but to produce and interchange.  Every
day, man, pressing forward more eagerly in civil careers, is less
disposed to put up with any obstacle that interferes with his aims; if
he still consents to be a soldier it is not to become an invader, but
to provide against invasion.  Meanwhile, war has become more
scientific and, through the complications of its machinery, more
costly; the State can no longer call out and enlist for life every
able-bodied man without ruining itself, nor put too many obstacles in
the way of the free industry which, through taxation, provides for its
expenses; however short-sighted the State may be, it consults civil
interests, even in its military interest.  - Thus, of the two nets in
which it has enveloped all human activity, one is rent asunder and the
other has slackened its meshes.  There is no longer any reason for
making the community omnipotent; the individual need not alienate
himself entirely; he may, without inconvenience, reserve to himself a
part of himself, and, if now called upon to sign a social contract,
you may be sure that he would make this reservation.


II

Changed minds.  - Conscience and its Christian origin.  - Honor and
its feudal origin.  - The individual of to-day refuses to surrender
himself entirely.  - His motives.  - Additional motives in modern
democracy.  - Character of the elective process and the quality of the
representative.

And so have not only outward circumstances changed, but the very human
attitudes are now different.  In the mind of modern man a feeling,
distasteful to the antique pact, has evolved.  - Undoubtedly, in
extreme cases and under the pressure of brutal necessity I may,
momentarily, sign a blank check.  But, never, if I understand what I
am doing, will I sign away in good faith the complete and permanent
abandonment of myself: it would be against conscience and against
honor, which two possessions are not to be alienated.  My honor and my
conscience are not to go out of my keeping; I am their sole guardian
and depositary; I would not even entrust them to my father.  - Both
these terms are recent and express two conceptions unknown to the
ancients,[6] both being of profound import and of infinite reach.
Through them, like a bud separated from its stem and taking root
apart, the individual has separated himself from the primitive body,
clan, family, caste or city in which he has lived indistinguishable
and lost in the crowd; he has ceased to be an organ and appendage; he
has become a personality.  - The first of these concepts is of
Christian origin the second of feudal origin; both, following each
other and conjoined, measure the enormous distance which separates an
antique soul from a modern soul.[7]

Alone, in the presence of God, the Christian has felt melting, like
wax, all the ties binding him to his group; this because he is in
front of the Great Judge, and because this infallible judge sees all
souls as they are, not confusedly and in masses, but clearly, each by
itself.  At the bar of His tribunal no one is answerable for another;
each answers for himself alone; one is responsible only for one's own
acts.  But those acts are of infinite consequence, for the soul,
redeemed by the blood of a God, is of immeasurable value; hence,
according as it has or has not profited by the divine sacrifice, so
will the reward or punishment be infinite; at the final judgment, an
eternity of torment or bliss opens before it.  All other interests
vanish alongside of a vision of such vastness.  Thenceforth,
righteousness is the most serious of all aims, not in the eyes of man,
but of God and again, day after day, the soul renews within itself
that tragic questioning in which the Judge interrogates and the sinner
responds.- Through this dialogue, which has been going on for eighteen
centuries, and which is yet to continue, conscience has grown more and
more sensitive, and man has conceived the idea of absolute justice.
Whether this is vested in an all-powerful master, or whether it is a
self-existent truth, like mathematical truths, in no way diminishes
its sacredness nor, consequently, from its authority.  It commands
with a superior voice and its commands must be obeyed, irrespective of
cost: there are strict duties to which every man is rigorously bound.
No pledge may relieve him of these duties; if not fulfilled because he
has given contrary pledges he is no less culpable on this account, and
besides, he is culpable for having pledged himself; the pledging of
himself to crimes was in itself a crime.  His fault thus appears to
himself twofold, and the inward prick galls him twice instead of once.
Hence, the more sensitive the conscience, the more loath it is to give
up; it rejects any promise which may lead to wrong-doing, and refuses
to give to give others any right of imposing remorse.

At the same time another sentiment has arisen, not less valuable, but
hardier, more energetic, more human and more effective.  On his own in
his stronghold, the feudal chieftain, at the head of his band, could
depend on nobody but himself, for a public force did not then exist.
It was necessary that he should protect himself, and, indeed, over-
protect himself.  Whoever, in the anarchical and military society in
which he lived, allowed the slightest encroachment, or left unpunished
the slightest approach to insult, was regarded as weak or craven and
at once became a prey; one had to be proud-spirited, if not, one
risked death.  This was not difficult either.  Sole proprietor and
nearly absolute sovereign, with neither equals or peers on his domain,
here he was unique being, superior and incomparable to every one
else.[8]  On that subject revolved his long monologue during his hours
of gloomy solitude, which soliloquy has lasted for nine centuries.[9]
Thus in his own eyes, his person and all that depends on him are
inviolable; rather than tolerate the slightest infringement on his
prerogatives he will dare all and sacrifice all.[10] A sensitive pride
(orgueil exalté) is the best of sentinels to protect a right; for, not
only does it mount guard over the right to preserve it, but, again,
and especially, for its own satisfaction; the imagination has
conceived a personality appropriate for his rank, and this character
the man imposes on himself as his role.  Henceforth, he not only
forces the respect of others, but he respects himself; he possesses
the sentiment of honor, a generous self-esteem which makes him regard
himself as noble and incapable of doing anything mean.  In
discriminating between his actions, he may err; fashion or vanity may
sometimes lead him too far, or lead him astray, either on the path of
recklessness or on that of puerility; his point of honor may be fixed
in the wrong direction.  But, in sum, and thanks to this being a fixed
point, he will maintain himself erect even under an absolute monarchy,
under a Philip II.  in Spain, under a Louis XIV.  in France, under a
Frederick II.  in Prussia.  From the feudal baron or gentleman of the
court to the modern gentleman, this tradition persists and descends
from story to story down to lowest social substratum: to-day, every
man of spirit, the bourgeois, the peasant, the workman, has his point
of honor like the noble.  He likewise, in spite of the social
encroachments that gain on him, reserves to himself his private nook,
a sort of moral stronghold wherein he preserves his faiths, his
opinions, his affections, his obligations as son, husband and father;
it is the sacred treasury of his innermost being.  This stronghold
belongs to him alone; no one, even in the name of the public, has a
right to enter it; to surrender it would be cowardice, rather than
give up its keys he would die in the breach;[11] when this militant
sentiment of honor is enlisted on the side of conscience it becomes
virtue itself.[12] - Such are, in these days, (1870) the two central
themes of our European morality.[13]  Through the former the
individual recognizes duties from which nothing can exempt him;
through the latter, he claims rights of which nothing can deprive him:
our civilization has vegetated from these two roots, and still
vegetates.  Consider the depth and the extent of the historical soil
in which they penetrate, and you may judge of their vigor.  Consider
the height and unlimited growth of the trees which they nourish, and
you may judge of their healthiness.  Everywhere else, one or other
having failed, in China, in the Roman Empire, in Islam, the sap has
dried downward and the tree has become stunted, or has fallen....  It
is the modern man, who is neither Chinese, nor antique, nor Moslem,
nor Negro, nor savage, the man formed by Christian education and
taking refuge in his conscience as in a sanctuary, the man formed by
feudal education and entrenched behind his honor as in a fortress,
whose sanctuary and stronghold the new social contract bids him
surrender.

Now, in this democracy founded on the preponderance of numbers, into
whose hands am I required to make this surrender? - Theoretically, to
the community, that is to say, to a crowd in which an anonymous
impulse is the substitute for individual judgment; in which action
becomes impersonal because it is collective; in which nobody
acknowledges responsibility; in which I am borne along like a grain of
sand in a whirlwind; in which all sorts of outrages are condoned
beforehand for reasons of state: practically, to the plurality of
voices counted by heads, to a majority which, over-excited by the
struggle for mastery, will abuse its victory and wrong the minority to
which I may belong; to a provisional majority which, sooner or later,
will be replaced by another, so that if I am to-day oppressor I am
sure of being oppressed to-morrow; still more particularly, to six or
seven hundred representatives, among who I am called upon to choose
but one.  To elect this unique mandatory I have but one vote among ten
thousand; and in helping to elect him I am only the ten-thousandth; I
do not even count for a ten-thousandth in electing the others.  And it
is these six or seven hundred strangers to me to who I give full power
to decide for me - note the expression full power - which means
unlimited power, not alone over my possessions and life, but, again,
over my conscience, with all its powers combined; that is to say, with
powers much more extensive than those I confer separately on ten
persons in whom I place the most confidence - to my legal adviser who
looks after my fortune, to the teacher of my children, to the
physician who cares for my health, to the confessor who directs my
conscience, to friends who are to serve as executors of my last will
and testament, to seconds in a duel who decide on my life, on the was
of my blood and who guard my honor.  Without reference to the
deplorable farce, so often played around the ballot-box, or to the
forced and distorted elections which put a contrary interpretation on
public sentiment, or to the official lies by which, at this very
moment, a few fanatics and madmen, who represent nobody but
themselves, assume to represent the nation,[14] measure what degree of
confidence I may have, even after honest elections, in mandatories who
are thus chosen! Frequently, I have voted for the defeated candidate;
in which case I am represented by the other who I did not want for a
representative.  In voting for the elected candidate, I did it because
I knew of no better one, and because his opponent seemed to me worse.
I have only seen him one time out of four and then fleetingly, at odd
moment; I scarcely knew more of him than the color of his coat, the
tone of his voice, and the way he has of thumping his breast.  All I
know of him is through his "platform," vague and declamatory, through
editorials, and through drawing-room, coffee-house, or street gossip.
His title to my confidence is of the flimsiest and shallowest kind;
there is nothing to substantiate to me his integrity or competency; he
has no diploma, and no one to endorse him as has a private tutor; he
has no guarantee from the society to which he belongs, like the
physician, the priest or the lawyer.  With references as poor as these
I should hesitate to recruit him even as a domestic.  And all the more
because the class from which I am obliged to take him is almost always
that of politicians, a suspicious class, especially in countries in
which universal suffrage prevails.  This class is not recruited among
the most independent, the ablest, and the most honest, but among
voluble, scheming men, zealous charlatans, who for want of
perseverance, having failed in private careers, in situations where
one is watched too closely and too nicely weighed in the balance, have
selected roles in which the want of scrupulousness and discretion is a
force instead of a weakness; to their indelicacy and impudence the
doors of a public career stand wide open.  - Such is the august
personage into whose hands, according to the theory, I am called upon
to surrender my will, my will in full; certainly, if self-renunciation
were necessary, I should risk less in giving myself up to a king or to
an aristocracy, even hereditary; for then would my representatives be
at least recommended by their evident rank and their probable
competency.  - Democracy, in its nature and composition, is a system
in which the individual awards to his representatives the least trust
and deference; hence, it is the system in which he should entrust them
with the least power.  Conscience and honor everywhere enjoin a man to
retain for himself some portion of his independence; but nowhere is
there so little be ceded.   If a modern constitution ought to clearly
define and limit the domain of the State, it is in respect of
contemporary democracy that it ought to be the most restrictive.

III.

Origin and nature of the modern State.  - Its functions, rights and
limits.

Let us try to define these limits.  - After the turmoil of invasions
and conquest, at the height of social disintegration, amidst the
combats daily occurring between private parties, there arose in every
European community a public force , which force, lasting for
centuries, still persists to our day.  How it was organized, through
what early stages of violence it passed, through what accidents and
struggles, and into whose hands it is now entrusted, whether
temporarily or forever, whatever the laws of its transmission, whether
by inheritance or election, is of secondary importance; the main thing
is its functions and their mode of operation.  It is essentially a
mighty sword, drawn from its scabbard and uplifted over the smaller
blades around it, with which private individuals once cut each others'
throats.  Menaced by it, the smaller blades repose in their scabbards;
they have become inert, useless, and, finally rusty; with few
exceptions, everybody save malefactors, has now lost both the habit
and the desire to use them, so that, henceforth, in this pacified
society, the public sword is so formidable that all private resistance
vanishes the moment it flashes.  - This sword is forged out of two
interests: it was necessary to have one of its magnitude, first,
against similar blades brandished by other communities on the
frontier, and next, against the smaller blades which bad passions are
always sharpening in the interior.  People demanded protection against
outside enemies and inside ruffians and murderers, and, slowly and
painfully, after much groping and much re-tempering, the agreement
between hereditary forces has fashioned the sole arm which is capable
of protecting lives and property with any degree of success.  - So
long as it does no more I am indebted to the State which holds the
hilt: it gives me a security which, without it, I could not have
enjoyed.  In return for this security I owe it, for my quota, the
means for keeping this weapon in good condition: he who enjoys a
service is under an obligation to pay for it.  Accordingly, there is
between the State and myself, if not an express contract, at least a
tacit understanding equivalent to that which binds a child to its
parent, a believer to his church, and, on both sides, this mutual
understanding is clear and precise.  The state engages to look after
my security within and without; I engage to furnish the means for so
doing, which means consist of my respect and gratitude, my zeal as a
citizen, my services as a conscript, my contributions as a tax-payer,
in short, whatever is necessary for the maintenance of an army, a
navy, a diplomatic organization, civil and criminal courts, a militia
and police, central and local administrations, in short, a harmonious
set of organs of which my obedience and loyalty constitute the food,
the substance and the blood.  This loyalty and obedience, whatever I
am, whether rich or poor, Catholic, Protestant, Jew or free-thinker,
royalist or republican, individualist or socialist, upon my honor and
in my conscience I owe.  This because I have received the equivalent;
I am delighted that I am not vanquished, assassinated, or robbed.  I
reimburse the State, exactly but not more that which it has spent on
equipment and personnel for keeping down brutal cupidity, greedy
appetites, deadly fanaticism, the entire howling pack of passions and
desires of which, sooner or later, I might become the prey, were it
not constantly to extend over me its vigilant protection.  When it
demands its outlay of me it is not my property which it takes away,
but its own property, which it collects and, in this light, it may
legitimately force me to pay.  - On condition, however, that it does
not exact more than my liabilities, and this it does when it oversteps
its original engagements;

1.  when it undertakes some extra material or moral work that I do not
ask for;
2.  when it constitutes itself sectarian, moralist, philanthropist, or
pedagogue;
3.  when it strives to propagate within its borders, or outside of
them, any religious or philosophic dogma, or any special political or
social system.
For then, it adds a new article to the primitive pact, for which
article there is not the same unanimous and assured assent that
existed for the pact.  We are all willing to be secured against
violence and fraud; outside of this, and on almost any other point,
there are divergent wills.  I have my own religion, my own opinions,
my habits, my customs, my peculiar views of life and way of regarding
the universe; now, this is just what constitutes my personality, what
honor and conscience forbid me to alienate, and which the State has
promised me to protect.  Consequently, when, through its additional
article, it attempts to regulate these in a certain way, if that way
is not my way, it fails to fulfill its primordial engagement and,
instead of protecting me, it oppresses me.  Even if it should have the
support of a majority, even if all voters, less one, should agree to
entrusting it with this supererogatory function, were there only one
dissenter, he would be wronged, and in two ways.  -

First of all, and in any event, the State, to fulfill its new tasks,
exacts from him an extra amount of subsidy and service; for, every
supplementary work brings along with it supplementary expenses; the
budget is overburdened when the State takes upon itself the procuring
of work for laborers or employment for artists, the maintenance of any
particular industrial or commercial enterprise, the giving of alms,
and the furnishing of education.  To an expenditure of money add an
expenditure of lives, should it enter upon a war of generosity or of
propaganda.  Now, to all these expenditures that it does not approve
of, the minority contributes as well as the majority which does
approve of them; so much the worse for the conscript and the tax-payer
if they belong to the dissatisfied group.  Like it or not, the
collector puts his hand in the tax-payer's pocket, and the sergeant
lays his hand on the conscript's collar.  -

 In the second place, and in many circumstances, not only does the
State unjustly take more than its due, but it uses the money it has
extorted from me to apply unjustly new constraints against me.  Such
is the case,

* when it imposes on me its theology or philosophy;
* when it prescribes for me, or interdicts, a cult;
* when it assumes to regulate my ways and habits,
* when it assumes to limit my labor or expenditure,
* when it assumes to direct the education of my children,
* when it assumes to fix the prices of my wares or the rate of my
wages.
For then, to enforce its commands and prohibitions, it enacts light or
serious penalties against the recalcitrant, all the way from political
or civil incapacity to fines, imprisonment, exile and the guillotine.
In other words, the money I do not owe it, and of which it robs me,
pays for the persecution which it inflicts upon me; I am reduced to
paying out of my own purse the wages of my inquisitors, my jailer and
my executioner.  A more glaring oppression could not be imagined! -
Let us watch out for the encroachments of the State and not allow it
to become anything more than a watch-dog.  Whilst the teeth and nails
of other guests in the household have been losing their sharpness, its
fangs have become formidable; it is now colossal and it alone still
keeps up the practice of fighting.  Let us supply it with nourishment
against wolves; but never let it touch peaceable folks around the
table.  Appetite grows by eating; it would soon become a wolf itself,
and the most ravenous wolf inside the fold.  The important thing is to
keep a chain around its neck and confine it within its own enclosure.

IV.

The state is tempted to encroach.  - Precedents and reasons for its
pretensions.

Let us go around the fold, which is an extensive one, and, through its
extensions, reach into almost every nook of private life.  -  Each
private domain, indeed, physical or moral, offers temptations for its
neighbors to trespass on it, and, to keep this intact, demands the
superior intervention of a third party.  To acquire, to possess, to
sell, to give, to bequeath, to contract between husband and wife,
father, mother or child, between master or domestic, employer or
employee, each act and each situation, involves rights limited by
contiguous and adverse rights, and it is the State which sets up the
boundary between them.  Not that it creates this boundary; but, that
this may be recognized, it draws the line and therefore enacts civil
laws which it applies through its courts and gendarmes in such a way
as to secure to each individual what belongs to him.  The State
stands, accordingly, as regulator and controller, not alone of private
possessions, but also of the family and of domestic life; its
authority is thus legitimately introduced into that reserved circle in
which the individual will has entrenched itself, and, as is the habit
of all great powers, once the circle is invaded, its tendency is to
occupy it fully and entirely.  - To this end, it invokes a new
principle.  Constituted as a moral personality, the same as a church,
university, or charitable or scientific body, is not the State bound,
like every corporate body that is to last for ages, to extend its
vision far and near and prefer to private interests, which are only
life-interests, the common interest (l'intérêt commun) which is
eternal? Is not this the superior end to which all others should be
subordinated, and must this interest, which is supreme over all, be
sacrificed to two troublesome instincts which are often unreasonable
and sometimes dangerous; to conscience, which overflows in mystic
madness, and to honor, which may lead to strife even to murderous
duels? - Certainly not, and first of all when, in its grandest works,
the State, as legislator, regulates marriages, inheritances, and
testaments, then it is not respect for the will of individuals which
solely guides it; it does not content itself with obliging everybody
to pay his debts, including even those which are tacit, involuntary
and innate; it takes into account the public interest; it calculates
remote probabilities, future contingencies, all results singly and
collectively.  Manifestly, in allowing or forbidding divorce, in
extending or restricting what a man may dispose of by testament, in
favoring or interdicting substitutions, it is chiefly in view of some
political, economical or social advantage, either to refine or
consolidate the union of the sexes, to implant in the family habits of
discipline or sentiments of affection, to excite in children an
initiatory spirit, or one of concord, to prepare for the nation a
staff of natural chieftains, or an army of small proprietors, and
always authorized by the universal assent.  Moreover, and always with
this universal assent, it does other things outside the task
originally assigned to it, and nobody finds that it usurps when,

* it coins money,
* it regulates weights and measures,
* it establishes quarantines,
* on condition of an indemnity, it expropriates private property for
public utility,
* it builds lighthouses, harbors, dikes, canals, roads,
* it defrays the cost of scientific expeditions,
* it founds museums and public libraries;
* at times, toleration is shown for its support of universities,
schools, churches, and theaters,
and, to justify fresh drafts on private purses for such objects, no
reason is assigned for it but the common interest.  (l'intérêt commun)
- Why should it not, in like manner, take upon itself every enterprise
for the benefit of all? Why should it hesitate in commanding the
execution of every work advantageous to the community, and why abstain
from forbidding every harmful work? Now please note that in human
society every act or omission, even the most concealed or private, is
either a loss or a gain to society.  So if I neglect to take care of
my property or of my health, of my intellect or of my soul, I
undermine or weaken in my person a member of the community which can
only be rich, healthy and strong through the wealth, health and
strength of his fellow members, so that, from this point of view, my
private actions are all public benefits or public injuries.  Why then,
from this point of view, should the State scruple about prescribing
some of these to me and forbidding others? Why, in order to better
exercise this right, and better fulfill this obligation, should it not
constitute itself the universal contractor for labor, and the
universal distributor of productions? Why should it not become the
sole agriculturist, manufacturer and merchant, the unique proprietor
and administrator of all France? - Precisely because this would be
opposed to the common weal (l'intérêt de tous, the interest of
everyone)[15].   Here the second principle, that advanced against
individual independence, operates inversely, and, instead of being an
adversary, it becomes a champion.  Far from setting the State free, it
puts another chain around its neck, and thus strengthens the fence
within which modern conscience and modern honor have confined the
public guardian.

V.

Direct common interest.  - This consists in the absence of constraint.
- Two reasons in favor of freedom of action.  - Character, in general,
of the individual man.  - Modern complication.

In what, indeed, does the common weal (l'intérêt de tous, the interest
of everyone) consist? - In the interest of each person, while that
which interests each person is the things of which the possession is
agreeable and deprivation painful.  The whole world would in vain
gainsay this point; every sensation is personal.  My suffering and my
enjoyments are not to be contested any more than my inclination for
objects which procure me the one, and my dislike of objects which
procure me the other.  There is, therefore, no arbitrary definition of
each one's particular interest; this exists as a fact independently of
the legislator; all that remains is to show what this interest is, and
what each individual prefers.  Preferences vary according to race,
time, place and circumstance.  Among the possessions which are ever
desirable and the privation of which is ever dreaded, there is one,
however, which, directly desired, and for itself, becomes, through the
progress of civilization, more and more cherished, and of which the
privation becomes, through the progress of civilization, more and more
grievous.  That is the disposition of one's self, the full ownership
of one's body and property, the faculty of thinking, believing and
worshipping as one pleases, of associating with others, of acting
separately or along with others, in all senses and without hindrance;
in short, one's liberty.  That this liberty may as extensive as
possible is, in all times, one of man's great needs, and, in our days,
it is his greatest need.  There are two reasons for this, one natural
and the other historical.  -

By nature Man is an individual, that is to say a small distinct world
in himself, a center apart in an enclosed circle, a detached organism
complete in itself and which suffers when his spontaneous inclinations
are frustrated by the intervention of an outside force.

The passage of time has made him a complicated organism, upon which
three or four religions, five or six civilizations, thirty centuries
of rich culture have left their imprint; in which its acquisitions are
combined together, wherein inherited qualities are crossbred, wherein
special traits have accumulated in such a way as to produce the most
original and the most sensitive of beings.  As civilization increases,
so does his complexity: with the result that man's originality
strengthens and his sensitivity become keener; from which it follows
that the more civilized he becomes, the greater his repugnance to
constraint and uniformity.

 At the present day, (1880), each of us is the terminal and peculiar
product of a vast elaboration of which the diverse stages occur in
this order but once, a plant unique of its species, a solitary
individual of superior and finer essence which, with its own inward
structure and its own inalienable type, can bear no other than its own
characteristic fruit.  Nothing could be more adverse to the interest
of the oak than to be tortured into bearing the apples of the apple
tree; nothing could be more adverse to the interests of the apple tree
than to be tortured into bearing acorns; nothing could be more opposed
to the interests of both oak and apple tree, also of other trees, than
to be pruned, shaped and twisted so as all to grow after a forced
model, delineated on paper according to the rigid and limited
imagination of a surveyor.  The least possible constraint is,
therefore, everybody's chief interest; if one particular restrictive
agency is established, it is that every one may be preserved by if
from other more powerful constraints, especially those which the
foreigner and evil-doer would impose.  Up to that point, and not
further, its intervention is beneficial; beyond that point, it becomes
one of the evils it is intended to forestall.  Such then, if the
common weal is to be looked after, the sole office of the State is,

1.  to prevent constraint and, therefore, never to use it except to
prevent worse constraints;
2.  to secure respect for each individual in his own physical and
moral domain; never to encroach on this except for that purpose and
then to withdraw immediately;
3.  to abstain from all indiscreet meddling, and yet more, as far as
is practicable, without any sacrifice of public security;
4.  to reduce old assessments, to exact only a minimum of subsidies
and services;
5.  to gradually limit even useful action;
6.  to set itself as few tasks as possible;
7.  to let each one have all the room possible and the maximum of
initiative;
8.  to slowly abandon monopolies;
9.  to refrain from competition with private parties;
10.  to rid itself of functions which these private parties can
fulfill equally well -
and we see that the limits assigned to the State by the public
interest (l'intérêt commun) correspond to those stipulated by duty and
justice.

VI.

Indirect common interest.  - This consists in the most economical and
most productive employment of spontaneous forces.  - Difference
between voluntary labor and forced labor.  - Sources of man's
spontaneous action.  Conditions of their energy, work and products.  -
Motives for leaving them under personal control.  - Extent of the
private domain.  - Individuals might voluntarily extend it.  - What is
left becomes the domain of the State.  - Obligatory functions of the
State.  - Optional functions of the State.

Let us now take into consideration, no longer the direct, but the
indirect interest of all.  Instead of considering individuals let us
concern ourselves with their works.  Let us regard human society as a
material and spiritual workshop, whose perfection consists in making
it as productive, economical, and as well furnished and managed as
possible .  Even with this secondary and subordinate aim, the domain
of the State is scarcely to be less restricted: very few new functions
are to be attributed to it; nearly all the rest will be better
fulfilled by independent persons, or by natural or voluntary
associations.  -

Let us consider the man who works for his own benefit, the farmer, the
manufacturer, the merchant, and observe how attentive he is to his
business.  This is because his interest and pride are involved.  One
side his welfare and that of those around him is at stake, his
capital, his reputation, his social position and advancement; on the
other side, are poverty, ruin, social degradation, dependence,
bankruptcy and the alms-house.  In the presence of this alternative he
keeps close watch and becomes industrious; he thinks of his business
even when abed or at his meals; he studies it, not from a distance,
speculatively, in a general way, but on the spot, practically, in
detail, in all its bearings and relationships, constantly calculating
difficulties and resources, with such sharp insight and special
information that for any other person to try to solve the daily
problem which he solves, would be impossible, because nobody could
possess or estimate as he can the precise elements which constitute
it.  - Compare with this unique devotion and these peculiar
qualifications the ordinary capacity and listless regularity of a
senior public official, even when expert and honest.  He is sure of
his salary, provided he does his duty tolerably well, and this he does
when he is occupied during official hours.  Let his papers be correct,
in conformity with regulations and custom, and nothing more is asked
of him; he need not tax his brain beyond that.  If he conceives any
economical measure, or any improvement of his branch of the service,
not he, but the public, an anonymous and vague impersonality, reaps
all the benefit of it.  Moreover, why should he care about it, since
his project or reform might end up in the archives.  The machine is
too vast and complicated, too unwieldy, too clumsy, with its rusty
wheels, its " old customs and acquired rights," to be renewed and
rebuilt as one might a farm, a warehouse or a foundry.  Accordingly,
he has no idea of troubling himself further in the matter; on leaving
his office he dismisses it from his mind; he lets things go on
automatically, just as it happens, in a costly way and with
indifferent results.  Even in a country of as much probity as France,
it is calculated that every enterprise managed by the State costs one
quarter more, and brings in one quarter less, than when entrusted to
private hands.  Consequently if work were withheld from individuals in
order that the State might undertake it the community, when the
accounts came to be balanced, would suffer a loss of one-half.[16]

Now, this is true of all work, whether spiritual or material not only
of agricultural, industrial and commercial products, but, again, of
works of science and of art, of literature and philosophy, of charity,
of education and propaganda.  Not only when driven by egoism, such as
personal interest and vulgar vanity, but also when a disinterested
sentiment is involved, such the discovery of truth, the creation of
beauty, the propagation of a faith, the diffusion of convictions,
religious enthusiasm or natural generosity, love in a broad or a
narrow sense, spanning from one who embraces all humanity to one who
devotes himself wholly to his friends and kindred.  The effect is the
same in both cases, because the cause is the same.  Always, in the
shop directed by the free workman, the motivating force is enormous,
almost infinite, because it is a living spring which flows at all
hours and is inexhaustible.  The mother thinks constantly of her
child, the savant of his science, the artist of his art, the inventor
of his inventions, the philanthropist of his endowments, Faraday of
electricity, Stephenson of his locomotive, Pasteur of his microbes, De
Lesseps of his isthmus, sisters of charity of their poor.  Through
this peculiar concentration of thought, man derives every possible
advantage from human faculties and surroundings; he himself gets to be
a more and more perfect instrument, and, moreover, he fashions others:
with this he daily reduces the friction of the powerful machine which
he controls and of which he is the main wheel; he increases its yield
; he economizes, maintains, repairs and improves it with a capability
and success that nobody questions; in short, he fabricates in a
superior way.  - But this living source, to which the superiority of
the works is due, cannot be separated from the owner and chief, for it
issues from his own affections and deepest sentiments.  It is useless
without him; out of his hands, in the hands of strangers, the fountain
ceases to flow and production stops.  - If, consequently, a good and
large yield is required, he alone must have charge of the mill; he is
the resident owner of it, the one who sets it in motion, the born
engineer, installed and specially designed for that position.  In vain
may attempts be made to turn the stream elsewhere; there simply ensues
a stoppage of the natural issue, a dam barring useful canals, a
haphazard change of current not only without gain, but loss, the
stream subsiding in swamps or undermining the steep banks of a ravine.
At the utmost, the millions of buckets of water, forcibly taken from
private reservoirs, half fill with a good deal of trouble the great
central artificial basin in which the water, low and stagnant, is
never sufficient in quantity or force to move the huge public wheel
that replaces the small private wheels, doing the nation's work.

Thus, even when we only consider men as manufactures, even if we treat
them simply as producers of what is valuable and serviceable, with no
other object in view than to furnish society with supplies and to
benefit the consumers, even though the private domain includes all
enterprises undertaken by private individuals, either singly or
associated together, through personal interests or personal taste,
then this is enough to ensure that all is managed better than the
State could have done; it is by virtue of this that they have devolved
into their hands.  Consequently, in the vast field of labor, they
themselves decide on what they will undertake; they themselves, of
their own authority, set their own limits.  They may therefore enlarge
their own domain to any extent they please, and reduce indefinitely
the domain of the State.  On the contrary, the State cannot pretend to
more than what they leave; as they advance on their common territory
separated by vague frontiers, it is bound to recede and leave the
ground to them; whatever the task is, it should not perform it except
in case of their default, or their prolonged absence, or on proof of
their having abandoned it.

All the rest, therefore falls to the State; first, the offices which
they would never claim, and which they will deliberately leave in its
hands, because they do not have that indispensable instrument, called
armed force.  This force forces assures the protection of the
community against foreign communities, the protection of individuals
against one another, the levying of soldiers, the imposition of taxes,
the execution of the laws, the administration of justice and of the
police.  - Next to this, come matters of which the accomplishment
concerns everybody without directly interesting any one in particular
- the government of unoccupied territory, the administration of
rivers, coasts, forests and public highways, the task of governing
subject countries, the framing of laws, the coinage of money, the
conferring of a civil status, the negotiating in the name of the
community with local and special corporations, departments, communes,
banks, institutions, churches, and universities.  - Add to these,
according to circumstances, sundry optional co-operative services,[17]
such as subsidies granted to institutions of great public utility, for
which private contributions could not suffice, now in the shape of
concessions to corporations for which equivalent obligations are
exacted, and, again, in those hygienic precautions which individuals
fail to take through indifference; so occasionally, such provisional
aid as supports a man, or so stimulates him as to enable him some day
or other to support himself; and, in general, those discreet and
scarcely perceptible interpositions for the time being which prove so
advantageous in the future, like a far-reaching code and other
consistent regulations which, mindful of the liberty of the existing
individual, provide for the welfare of coming generations.  Nothing
beyond that.

Again, in this preparation for future welfare the same principle still
holds.

VII.

Fabrication of social instruments.  - Application of this principle.
- How all kinds of useful laborers are formed.  - Respect for
spontaneous sources, the essential and adequate condition.  -
Obligation of the State to respect these.  - They dry up when it
monopolizes them.  - The aim of patriotism.  - The aim of other
liberal dispositions.  - Impoverishment of all the productive
faculties.  - Destructive effect of the Jacobin system.

Among the precious products, the most precious and important are,
evidently, the animated instruments, namely the men, since they
produce the rest.  The object then, is to fashion men capable of
physical, mental or moral labor, the most energetic, the most
persistent, the most skillful and most productive; now, we already
know the conditions of their formation.  It is essential and
sufficient, that the vivacious sources, described above, should flow
there, on the spot, each through its natural outlet, and under the
control of the owner.  On this condition the jet becomes more
vigorous, for the acquired impetus increases the original outflow; the
producer becomes more and more skillful, since 'practice makes
perfect.' Those around him likewise become better workmen, inasmuch as
they find encouragement in his success and avail themselves of his
discoveries.  - Thus, simply because the State respects, and enforces
respect, for these individual sources in private hands, it develops in
individuals, as well as in those around them, the will and the talent
for producing much and well, the faculty for, and desire to, keep on
producing more and better; in other words, all sorts of energies and
capacities, each of its own kind and in its own place, with all
compatible fullness and efficiency.  Such is the office, and the sole
office, of the State, first in relation to the turbid and frigid
springs issuing from selfishness and self-conceit, whose operations
demand its oversight, and next for still stronger reasons, in relation
to the warm and pure springs whose beneficence is unalloyed, as in the
family affections and private friendships; again, in relation to those
rarer and higher springs, such as the love of beauty, the yearning for
truth, the spirit of association, patriotism and love of mankind; and,
finally, for still stronger reasons, in relation to the two most
sacred and salutary of all springs, conscience which renders will
subject to duty, and honor which makes will the support of justice.
Let the State prevent, as well as abstain from, any interference with
either; let this be its object and nothing more; its abstention is as
necessary as its vigilance.  Let it guard both, and it will see
everywhere growing spontaneously, hourly, each in degree according to
conditions of time and place, the most diligent and most competent
workmen, the agriculturist, the manufacturer, the merchant, the
savant, the artist, the inventor, the propagandist, the husband and
wife, the father and mother, the patriot, the philanthropist and the
sister of charity.

On the contrary, if, like our Jacobins, the State seeks to confiscate
every natural force to its own profit, it seeks to make affection for
itself paramount, if it strives to suppress all other passions and
interests, if it tolerates no other preoccupation than that which
concerns the common weal, if it tries to forcibly convert every member
of society into a Spartan or Jesuit, then, at enormous cost, will it
not only destroy private fountains, and spread devastation over the
entire territory, but it will destroy its own fountain-head.  We honor
the State only for the services it renders to us, and proportionately
to these services and the security it affords us, and to the liberty
which it ensures us under the title of universal benefactor; when it
deliberately wounds us through our dearest interests and most tender
affections, when it goes so far as to attack our honor and conscience,
when it becomes the universal wrong-doer, our affection for it, in the
course of time, turns into hatred.  Let this system be maintained, and
patriotism, exhausted, dries up, and, one by one, all other beneficent
springs, until, finally, nothing is visible over the whole country,
but stagnant pools or overwhelming torrents, inhabited by passive
subjects or depredators.  As in the Roman empire in the fourth
century, in Italy in the seventeenth century, in the Turkish provinces
in our own day, naught remains but an ill-conducted herd of stunted,
torpid creatures, limited to their daily wants and animal instincts,
indifferent to the public welfare and to their own prospective
interests, so degenerate as to have lost sight of their own
discoveries, unlearned their own sciences, arts and industries, and,
in short, and worse than all, base, false, corrupted souls entirely
wanting in honor and conscience.  Nothing is more destructive than the
unrestricted meddling of the State, even when wise and paternal; in
Paraguay, under the discipline of Jesuits, so minute in its details,
"Indian physiognomy appeared like that of animals taken in a trap."
They worked, ate, drank and gave birth by sound of bells, under watch
and ward, correctly and mechanically, but showing no liking for
anything, not even for their own existence, being transformed into so
may automatons; at least it may be said is that the means employed to
produce this result were gentle and that they, before their
transformation were mere brutes.  But those who the revolutionary-
Jesuit now undertakes to transform into robots, and by harsh means,
are human beings.

VIII.

Comparison between despotisms.  - Philip II and Louis XIV.  - Cromwell
and Frederick the Great.  - Peter the Great and the Sultans.  -
Relationship between the tasks the Jacobins are to carry out and the
assets at their disposal.  - Disproportion between the burdens they
are to carry and the forces at their disposal.  - Folly of their
undertaking.  - Physical force the only governmental force they
possess.  - They are compelled to exercise it.  - They are compelled
to abuse it.  - Character of their government.  - Character requisite
of their leaders.

Several times, in European history, despotism almost equally harsh
have born down heavily on human effort; but never have any of them
been so thoroughly inept; for none have ever attempted to raise so
heavy a mass with so short a lever.
And to start with, no matter how authoritative the despot might have
been, his intervention was limited.  -  Philip II.  burned heretics,
persecuted Moors and drove out Jews; Louis XIV.  forcibly converted
the Protestants; but both used violence only against dissenters, about
a fifteenth or a twentieth of their subjects.  If Cromwell, on
becoming Protector, remained sectarian, and the compulsory servant of
an army of sectarians, he took good care not to impose on other
churches the theology, rites and discipline of his own church;[18] on
the contrary, he repressed fanatical outrages; protected the
Anabaptists as well as his Independents.  He granted paid curates to
the Presbyterians as well as the public exercise of their worship, he
showed the Episcopalians a large tolerance and gave them the right to
worship in private; he maintained the two great Anglican universities
and allowed the Jews to erect a synagogue.  - Frederick II.  drafted
into his army every able-bodied peasant that he could feed; he kept
every man twenty years in the service, under a discipline worse than
slavery, with almost certain prospect of death; and in his last war,
he sacrificed about one sixth of his male subjects;[19] but they were
serfs, and his conscription did not touch the bourgeois class.  He put
his hands in the pockets of the bourgeois and of every other man, and
took every crown they had; when driven to it, he adulterated coin and
stopped paying his functionaries; but, under the scrutiny of his eyes,
always open, the administration was honest, the police effective,
justice exact, toleration unlimited, and the freedom of the press
complete; the king allowed the publication of the most cutting
pamphlets against himself, and their public sale, even at Berlin.  - A
little earlier, in the great empire of the east, Peter the Great,[20]
with whip in hand, lashed his Muscovite bears and made them drill and
dance in European fashion; but were bears accustomed from father to
son to the whip and chain; moreover, he stood as the orthodox head of
their faith, and left their mir (the village commune) untouched.  -
Finally, at the other extremity of Europe, and even outside of Europe,
in the seventh century the caliph, in the fifteenth century a sultan,
a Mahomet or an Omar, a fanatical Arab or brutal Turk, who had just
overcome Christians with the sword, himself assigned the limits of his
own absolutism: if the vanquished were reduced to the condition of
heavily ransomed tributaries and of inferiors daily humiliated, he
allowed them their worship, civil laws and domestic usages; he left
them their institutions, their convents and their schools; he allowed
them to administer the affairs of their own community as they pleased
under the jurisdiction of their patriarch, or other natural
chieftains.  - Thus whatever the tyrant may have been, he did not
attempt to entirely recast Man, nor to subject all his subjects to the
recasting.  However penetrating the tyranny, it stopped in the soul at
a certain point; that point reached, the sentiments were left free.
No matter how comprehensive this tyranny may have been, it affected
only one class of men; the others, outside the net, remained free.
When it wounded all at once all sensitive chords, it did so only to a
limited minority, unable to defend themselves.  As far as the
majority, able to protect itself, their main sensibilities were
respected, especially the most sensitive, this one or that one, as the
case might be, now the conscience which binds man to his religion, now
that amour-propre on which honor depends, and now the habits which
make man cling to customs, hereditary usages and outward observances.
As far as the others were concerned, those which relate to property,
personal welfare, and social position, it proceeded cautiously and
with moderation.  In this way the discretion of the ruler lessened the
resistance of the subject, and a daring enterprise, even mischievous,
was not outrageous; it might be carried out; nothing was required but
a force in hand equal to the resistance it provoked.

Again, and on the other hand, the tyrant possessed this force.  Very
many and very strong arms stood behind the prince ready to cooperate
with him and countervail any resistance.  - Behind Philip II.  or
Louis XIV.  ready to drive the dissidents out or at least to consent
to their oppression, stood the Catholic majority, as fanatical or as
illiberal as their king.  Behind Philip II., Louis XIV., Frederick
II., and Peter the Great, stood the entire nation, equally violent,
rallied around the sovereign through his consecrated title and
uncontested right, through tradition and custom, through a rigid
sentiment of duty and the vague idea of public security.  - Peter the
Great counted among his auxiliaries every eminent and cultivated man
in the country; Cromwell had his disciplined and twenty-times
victorious army; the caliph or sultan brought along with him his
military and privileged population.  - Aided by cohorts of this stamp,
it was easy to raise a heavy mass, and even maintain it in a fixed
position.  Once the operation was concluded there followed a sort of
equilibrium; the mass, kept in the air by a permanent counterbalance,
only required a little daily effort to prevent it from falling.

It is just the opposite with the Jacobin enterprise.  When it is put
into operation, the theory, more exacting, adds an extra weight to the
uplifted mass, and, finally, a burden of almost infinite weight.  - At
first, the Jacobin confined his attacks to royalty, to nobility, to
the Church, to parliaments, to privileges, to ecclesiastical and
feudal possessions, in short, to medieval foundations.  Then he
attacks yet more ancient and more solid foundations, positive
religion, property and the family.  - For four years he has been
satisfied with demolition and now he wants to construct.  His object
is not merely to do away with a positive faith and suppress social
inequality, to proscribe revealed dogmas, hereditary beliefs, an
established cult, the supremacy of rank and superiority of fortunes,
wealth, leisure, refinement and elegance, but he wants, in addition to
all this, to re-fashion the citizen.  He wants to create new
sentiments, impose natural religion on the individual, civic
education, uniform ways and habits, Jacobin conduct, Spartan virtue;
in short, nothing is to be left in a human being that is not
prescribed, enforced and constrained.  - Henceforth, there is opposed
to the Revolution, not alone the partisans of the ancient régime -
priests, nobles, parliamentarians, royalists, and Catholics - but,
again, every person imbued with European civilization, every member of
a regular family, any possessor of a capital, large or small; every
kind or degree of proprietor, farmer, manufacturer, merchant, artisan
or farmer, even most of the revolutionaries.  Nearly all the
revolutionaries count on escaping the constraints they impose, and who
only like the strait jacket when it is on another's back.  - The
influence of resistant wills at this moment becomes incalculable: it
would be easier to raise a mountain, and, just at this moment, the
Jacobins have deprived themselves of every moral force through which a
political engineer acts on human wills.

Unlike Philip II.  and Louis XIV.  they are not supported by the
intolerance of a vast majority, for, instead of fifteen or twenty
orthodox against one heretic, they count in their church scarcely more
than one orthodox against fifteen or twenty heretics.[21] - They are
not, like legitimate sovereigns, supported by the stubborn loyalty of
an entire population, following in the steps of its chieftain out of
the prestige of hereditary right and through habits of ancient fealty.
On the contrary, their reign is only a day old and they themselves are
interlopers.  At first installed by a coup d'état and afterwards by
the semblance of an election, they have extorted or obtained by trick
the suffrages through which they act.  They are so familiar with fraud
and violence that, in their own Assembly, the ruling minority has
seized and held on to power by violence and fraud, putting down the
majority by riots, and the departments by force of arms.  To give
their brutalities the semblance of right, they improvise two pompous
demonstrations, first, the sudden manufacture of a paper constitution,
which molders away in their archives, and next, the scandalous farce
of a hollow and compulsory plebiscite.  - A dozen leaders of the party
concentrate unlimited authority in their own hands; but, as admitted
by them, their authority is derivative; it is the Convention which
makes them its delegates; their precarious title has to be renewed
monthly; a turn of the majority may sweep them and their work away to-
morrow; an insurrection of the people, whom they have familiarized
with insurrection, may to-morrow sweep them away, their work and their
majority.  - They maintain only a disputed, limited and transient
ascendancy over their adherents.  They are not military chieftains
like Cromwell and Napoleon, generals of an army obeyed without a
murmur, but common stump-speakers at the mercy of an audience that
sits in judgment on them.  There is no discipline in this public;
every Jacobin remains independent by virtue of his principles; if he
accepts leaders, it is with a reservation of their worth to him;
selecting them as he pleases, he is free to change them when he
pleases; his trust in them is intermittent, his loyalty provisional,
and, as his adhesion depends on a mere preference, he always reserves
the right to discard the favorite of to-day as he has discarded the
favorite of yesterday.  In this audience, there is no such thing as
subordination; the lowest demagogue, any noisy subaltern, a Hébert or
Jacques Roux, aspiring to step out of the ranks, overbidding the
charlatans in office in order to obtain their places.  Even with a
complete and lasting ascendancy over an organized band of docile
supporters, the Jacobin leaders would be feeble for lack of reliable
and competent instruments; for they have but very few partisans other
than those of doubtful probity and of notorious incapacity.  -
Cromwell had around him, to carry out the puritan program, the moral
élite of the nation, an army of rigorists, with narrow consciences,
but much more strict towards themselves than towards others, men who
never drank and who never swore, who never indulged for a moment in
sensuality or idleness, who forbade themselves every act of omission
or commission about which they held any scruples, the most honest, the
most temperate, the most laborious and the most persevering of
mankind,[22] the only ones capable of laying the foundations of that
practical morality on which England and the United States still
subsist at the present day.  - Around Peter the Great, in carrying out
his European program, stood the intellectual élite of the country, an
imported staff of men of ability associated with natives of moderate
ability, every well-taught resident foreigner and indigenous Russian,
the only ones able to organize schools and public institutions, to set
up a vast central and regular system of administration, to assign rank
according to service and merit, in short, to erect on the snow and mud
of a shapeless barbarism a conservatory of civilization which,
transplanted like an exotic tree, grows and gradually becomes
acclimated.  - Around Couthon, Saint-Just, Billaud, Collot, and
Robespierre, with the exception of certain men devoted, not to
Utopianism but the country, and who, like Carnot, conform to the
system in order to save France, there are but a few sectarians to
carry out the Jacobin program.  These are men so short-sighted as not
to clearly comprehend its fallacies, or sufficiently fanatical to
accept its horrors, a lot of social outcasts and self-constituted
statesmen, infatuated through incommensurate faculties with the parts
they play, unsound in mind and superficially educated, wholly
incompetent, boundless in ambition, their consciences perverted,
callous or deadened by sophistry, hardened through arrogance or killed
by crime, by impunity and by success.

Thus, whilst other despots raise a moderate weight, calling around
them either the majority or the flower of the nation, employing the
best strength of the country and lengthening their lever (of
despotism) as much as possible, the Jacobins attempt to raise an
incalculable weight, repel the majority as well as the flower of the
nation, discard the best strength of the country, and shorten their
lever to the utmost.  They hold on only to the shorter end, the rough,
clumsy, iron-bound, creaking and grinding extremity, that is to say,
to physical force, - the means for physical constraint, the heavy hand
of the gendarme on the shoulder of the suspect, the jailer's bolts and
keys turned on the prisoner, the club used by the sans-culottes on the
back of the bourgeois to quicken his pace, and, better still, the
Septembriseur's pike thrust into the aristocrat's belly, and the blade
falling on the neck held fast in the clutches of the guillotine.  -
Such, henceforth, is the only machinery they posses for governing the
country, for they have deprived themselves of all other.  Their engine
has to be exhibited, for it works only on condition that its bloody
image be stamped indelibly on every body's imagination; if the Negro
monarch or the pasha desires to see heads bowing as he passes along,
he must be escorted by executioners.  They must abuse their engine
because fear losing its effect through habit, needs example to keep it
alive; the Negro monarch or the pasha who would keep the fear alive by
which he rules, must be stimulated every day; he must slaughter too
many to be sure of slaughtering enough; he must slaughter constantly,
in heaps, indiscriminately, haphazard, no matter for what offense, on
the slightest suspicion, the innocent along with the guilty.  He and
his are lost the moment they cease to obey this rule.  Every Jacobin,
like every African monarch or pasha, must it that he may be and remain
at the head of his band.  - That is the reason why the chiefs of the
party, its natural and pre-determined leaders, are theoreticians able
to grasp its principle and logicians capable of drawing its
consequences.  They are, however, so inept as to be unable to
understand that their enterprise exceeds both their own and all other
human resources, but shrewd enough to see that brutal force is their
only tool, inhuman enough to apply it unscrupulously and without
reserve, and perverted enough to murder at random in order to
disseminate terror.

Notes:

[1] Buchez et Roux, XXXII, 354.  (Speech by Robespierre in the
Convention, Floréal 18, year II.) " Sparta gleams like a flash of
lightening amidst profoundest darkness".

[2] Milos taken by the Athenians; Thebes, after Alexander's victory;
Corinth, after its capture by the Romans.  - In the Peloponnesian war,
the Plateans, who surrender at discretion, are put to death.  Nicias
is murdered in cold blood after his defeat in Sicily.  The prisoners
at gos-Potamos have their thumbs cut off.

[3] Fustel de Coulanges,"La Cité Antique", ch.  XVII.

[4] Plato, "The Apology of Socrates." - See also in the "Crito"
Socrates' reasons for not eluding the penalty imposed on him.  The
antique conception of the State is here clearly set forth.

[5] Cf.  the code of Manu, the Zendavesta, the Pentateuch and the
Tcheou-Li.  In this last code (Biot's translation), will be found the
perfection of the system, particularly in vol.  I., 241, 247, II.,
393, III., 9, 11, 21, 52.  "Every district chief, on the twelfth day
of the first moon, assembles together the men of his district and
reads to them the table of rules; he examines their virtue, their
conduct, their progress in the right path, and in their knowledge, and
encourages them; he investigates their errors, their failings and
prevents them from doing evil.  .  .  .  Superintendents of marriages
see that young people marry at the prescribed age." The reduction of
man to a State automaton is plain enough in the institution of
"Overseer of Gags.  .  ." At all grand hunts, at all gatherings of
troops, he orders the application of gags.  In these cases gags are
put in the soldiers' mouths; they then fulfill their duties without
tumult or shouting."

[6] These two words have no exact equivalents in Greek or Latin,
Conscientia, dignitas, honos denote different shade of meaning.  This
difference is most appreciable in the combination of the two modern
terms delicate conscience, scrupulous conscience, and the phrase of
stake one's honour on this or that, make it a point of honor, the laws
of honor, etc.  The technical terms of antique morality: the
beautiful, truthfulness, the sovereign good, indicate ideas of another
stamp and origin.

[7]  Alas, modern 20th century democratic Man has given up honor and
conscience, all he has got to do is to be correct and follow the
thousands of rules governing his life.  And , of course, make sure
that he is following orders or sure of not being caught when he breaks
the natural rules of friendship, honor or conscience.  Conscience, on
the other had, will always lurk somewhere in the shadows of our mind,
because we all know how we would like to be treated by others, and
will be forced not to transgress certain boundaries in case an
intended victim might be in a position to take his revenge.  That I am
not alone in seeing things this way I noted in an interview with the
79 year old French author Michel Déon in Le Figaro on the 16th of May
1998 in which Mr.  Déon said: " Everywhere we are still in a nursery.
A great movement attempting to turn us all into half-wits (une grande
campagne de crétinisation est en route).  When these are the only ones
left, the governments have an easy job.  It is very clever." (SR.)

[8] Montaigne, Essays, book I., ch.  42: " Observe in provinces far
from the court, in Brittany for example, the retinue, the subjects,
the duties, the ceremony, of a seignior living alone by himself,
brought up among his dependents, and likewise observe the flights of
his imagination, there is nothing which is more royal; he may allude
to his superior once a year, as if he were the King of Persia...  The
burden of sovereignty scarcely affects the French gentilhomme twice in
his life...  he who lurks in his own place avoiding dispute and trial
is as free as the Duke of Venice."

[9] "Mémoires de Chateaubriand," vol.  I.  ("Les Soirées au Chateau de
Cambourg".)

[10] In China, the moral principle is just the opposite.  The Chinese,
amidst obstacles and embarrassments, always enjoin siao-sin, which
means, "abate thy affections." (Huc, "L'Empire Chinoise," I., 204.)

[11] In the United states the moral order of things reposes chiefly on
puritan ideas; nevertheless deep traces of feudal conceptions are
found there; for instance, the general deference for women which is
quite chivalric there, and even excessive.

[12] Observe, from this point of view, in the woman of modern times
the defenses of female virtue.  The (male) sentiment of duty is the
first safeguard of modesty, but this has a much more powerful
auxiliary in the sentiment of honor, or deep innate pride.

[13] The moral standard varies, but according to a fixed law, the same
as a mathematical function.  Each community has its own moral
elements, organization, history and surroundings, and necessarily its
peculiar conditions of vitality.  When the queen been in a hive is
chosen and impregnated this condition involves the massacre of useless
male and female rivals (Darwin).  In China, it consists of paternal
authority, literary education and ritual observances.  In the antique
city, it consisted of the omnipotence of the State, gymnastic
education, and slavery.  In each century, and in each country, these
vital conditions are expressed by more or less hereditary passwords
which set forth or interdict this or that class of actions.  When the
individual feels the inward challenge he is conscious of obligation;
the moral conflict consists in the struggle within himself between the
universal password and personal desire.  In our European society the
vital condition, and thus the general countersign, is self-respect
coupled with respect for others (including women and children).  This
countersign, new in history, has a singular advantage over all
preceding ones: each individual being respected, each can develop
himself according to his nature; he can accordingly invent in every
sense, bring forth every sort of production and be useful to himself
and others in every way, thus enabling society to develop
indefinitely.

[14] Taine is probably speaking of the colonial wars in China and the
conquest of Madagascar.  (SR).

[15] Here Taine is seeing mankind as being male, strong and hardy;
however I feel that liberty is more desirable for the strong and
confident while the child, the lost, the sick, the ignorant or feeble
person is looking for protection, reassurance and guidance.  When
society consisted of strong independent farmers, hunters, warriors,
nomads or artisans backed by family and clan, liberty was an important
idea.  Today few if any can rise above the horde and gain the
insights, the wisdom and the competence which once was such a common
thing.  Today the strong seek promotion inside the hierarchy of the
welfare state rest-house.  (S.R.)

[16] This is just what Lenin could not believe when he read this
around 1906.  Even Taine did not see how much a French government
organization depended upon staff recruited from a hardworking, modest
and honest French population.  We have now lived to see how the
nationalization of private property in Egypt, Argentina, Algeria not
to speak of Ethiopia and India proved disastrous and how 40 years of
government ownership should degrade and corrupt the populations of
Russia, China, Yugoslavia, Albania etc.  (SR).

[17] When the function to be performed is of an uncertain or mixed
character the following rule may be applied in deciding whether the
State or individuals shall be entrusted with it; also in determining,
in the case of cooperation, what portion of it shall be assigned to
individuals and what portion to the State.  As a general rule, when
individuals, either singly or associated together, have a direct
interest in, or are drawn toward, a special function, and the
community has no direct interest therein, the matter belongs to
individuals and not to the State.  On the other hand, if the interest
of the community in any function is direct, and indirect for
individuals singly or associated together, it is proper for the State
and not for individuals to take hold of it.  - According to this rule
the limits of the public and private domain can be defined, which
limits, as they change backward and forward, may be verified according
to the changes which take place in interests and preferences, direct
or indirect.

[18] Carlyle: "Cromwell's Speeches and Letters," III., 418.
(Cromwell's address to the Parliament, September 17, 1656.)

[19] Seeley, "Life and Times of Stein," II., 143.  - Macaulay,
"Biographical essays," Frederick the Great.  33, 35, 87, 92.

[20] Eugene Schuyler, "Peter the Great," vol.  2.

[21] Cf.  "The Revolution" vol.  II., pp.  46 and 323, vol.  III., ch
I.  Archives des Affaires Etrangèrés.  Vol.  332.  (Letter by
Thiberge, Marseilles, Brumaire 14, year II.) "I have been to
Marteygne, a small town ten leagues from Marseilles, along with my
colleague Fournet; I found (je trouvée) seventeen patriots in a town
of give thousand population." - Ibid., (Letter by Regulus Leclerc,
Bergues, Brumaire 15, year II.) At Bergues, he says, "the municipality
is composed of traders with empty stores and brewers without beer
since the law of the maximum." Consequently there is universal
lukewarmness, "only forty persons being found to form a popular club,
holding sessions as a favor every five days.  .  .  .  Public spirit
at Bergues is dead; fanaticism rules." - Archives Nationales, F7, 7164
(Department of Var, reports of year V.  "General idea.") - "At
Draguignan, out of seven thousand souls, forty patriots, exclusifs,
despised or dishonest; at Vidauban, nine or ten exclusifs, favored by
the municipality and who live freely without their means being known;
at Brignolles, frequent robberies on the road by robbers said to have
been very patriotic in the beginning of the Revolution: people are
afraid of them and dare not name them; at Fréjus, nine leading
exclusifs who pass all their time in the cafe." - Berryat-Saint-Prix,
"La Justice Révolutionnaire," p.  146.  - Brutus Thierry, grocer,
member of the Rev.  Com.  Of Angers, said that "in angers, there were
not sixty revolutionaries."

[22] Macaulay.  "History of England," I., 152.  "The Royalists
themselves confessed that, in every department of honest industry, the
discarded warriors prospered beyond other men, that none was charged
with any theft or robbery, that none was heard to ask an alms, and
that, if a baker, a mason, or a waggoner attracted notice by his
diligence and sobriety, he was in all probability one of Oliver's old
soldiers."


BOOK THIRD.  THE MEN IN POWER.

CHAPTER I.  PSYCHOLOGY OF THE JACOBIN LEADERS.

I.

Marat.  - Disparity between his faculties and pretensions.  - The
Maniac.  - The Ambitious delirium.  - Rage for persecution.  - The
permanent nightmare.  - Homicidal frenzy.

Three men among the Jacobins, Marat, Danton and Robespierre, had
deserved preeminence and held authority: - that is because they, due
to a deformity or warping of their minds and their hearts, met the
required conditions.  -

Of the three, Marat is the most monstrous; he is nearly a madman, of
which he displays the chief characteristics - furious exaltation,
constant over-excitement, feverish restlessness, an inexhaustible
propensity for scribbling, that mental automatism and single-
mindedness of purpose constrained and ruled by a fixed idea.  In
addition to this, he displays the usual physical symptoms, such as
insomnia, a pallid complexion, hot-headed, foulness of dress and
person,[1] with, during the last five months of his life, rashes and
itching all over his body.[2]  Issuing from ill-matched stock, born of
a mixed blood and tainted with serious moral agitation,[3] he carries
within him a peculiar germ: physically, he is a freak, morally a
pretender, and one who covet all places of distinction.  His father,
who was a physician, intended, from his early childhood, that he
should be a scholar; his mother, an idealist, had prepared him to
become a philanthropist, while he himself always steered his course
towards both summits.

 "At five years of age," he says, "it would have pleased me to be a
school-master, at fifteen a professor, at eighteen an author, and a
creative genius at twenty,"[4]and, afterwards, up to the last, an
apostle and martyr to humanity.   "From my earliest infancy I had an
intense love of fame which changed its object at various stages of my
life, but which never left me for a moment." He rambled over Europe or
vegetated in Paris for thirty years, living a nomadic life in
subordinate positions, hissed as an author, distrusted as a man of
science and ignored as a philosopher, a third rate political writer,
aspiring to every sort of celebrity and to every honor, constantly
presenting himself as a candidate and as constantly rejected, - too
great a disproportion between his faculties and ambition! Without
talents,[5] possessing no critical acumen and of mediocre
intelligence, he was fitted only to teach some branch of the sciences,
or to practice some one of the arts, either as professor or doctor
more or less bold and lucky, or to follow, with occasional slips on
one side or the other, some path clearly marked out for him.  "But,"
he says, "I constantly refused any subject which did not hold out a
promise.  .  .  .  of showing off my originality and providing great
results, for I cannot make up my mind to treat a subject already well
done by others." - Consequently, when he tries to originate he merely
imitates, or commits mistakes.  His treatise on " Man" is a jumble of
physiological and moral common-places, made up of ill-digested reading
and words strung together haphazard,[6] of gratuitous and incoherent
suppositions in which the doctrines of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, coupled together, end in empty phraseology.  "Soul and Body
are distinct substances with no essential relationship, being
connected together solely through the nervous fluid;" this fluid is
not gelatinous for the spirits by which it is renewed contains no
gelatin; the soul, excited by this, excites that; hence the place
assigned to it "in the brain." - His " Optics"[7] is the reverse of
the great truth already discovered by Newton more than a century
before, and since confirmed by more than another century of experiment
and calculation.  On" Heat " and "Electricity" he merely puts forth
feeble hypotheses and literary generalizations; one day, driven to the
wall, he inserts a needle in a resin to make this a conductor, in
which piece of scientific trickery he is caught by the physicist
Charles.[8] He is not even qualified to comprehend the great
discoverers of his age, Laplace, Monge, Lavoisier, or Fourcroy; on the
contrary, he libels them in the style of a low rebellious subordinate,
who, without the shadow of a claim, aims to take the place of
legitimate authorities.  In Politics, he adopts every absurd idea in
vogue growing out of the "Contrat-Social" based on natural right, and
which he renders still more absurd by repeating as his own the
arguments advanced by those bungling socialists, who, physiologists
astray in the moral world, derive all rights from physical
necessities.

 "All human rights issue from physical wants[9]...   If a man has
nothing, he has a right to any surplus with which another gorges
himself.  What do I say? He has a right to seize the indispensable,
and, rather than die of hunger, he may cut another's throat and eat
his throbbing flesh.  .  .  .  Man has a right to self-preservation,
to the property, the liberty and even the lives of his fellow
creatures.  To escape oppression he has a right to repress, to bind
and to massacre.  He is free to do what he pleases to ensure his own
happiness."

It is plain enough what this leads to.  - But, let the consequences be
what they may, whatever he writes or does, it is always in self-
admiration and always in a counter sense, being as vain-glorious of
his encyclopedic impotence as he is of his social mischievousness.
Taking his word for it, his discoveries in Physics will render him
immortal[10]:

 "They will at least effect a complete transformation in Optics.  .  .
.  The true primitive colors were unknown before me."

He is a Newton, and still better.  Previous to his appearance "the
place occupied by the electrical fluid in nature, considered as an
universal agent, was completely ignored.   .  .  I have made it known
in such a way as to leave no further doubt about it."[11]  As to the
heat-engendering fluid, "that substance unknown until my discovery, I
have freed the theory from every hypothesis and conjecture, from every
alembic argument; I have purged it of error, I have rendered it
intuitive; I have written this out in a small volume which consigns to
oblivion all that scientific bodies have hitherto published on that
subject."[12]  Anterior to his treatise on "Man," the relationships
between moral and physics were incomprehensible.  "Descartes,
Helvetius, Hailer, Lecat, Hume, Voltaire, Bonnet, held this to be an
impenetrable secret, 'an enigma.'"  He has solved the problem, he has
fixed the seat of the soul, he has determined the medium through which
the soul communicates with the body.[13] - In the higher sciences,
those treating of nature generally, or of human society, he reaches
the climax.  "I believe that I have exhausted every combination of the
human intellect in relation to morals, philosophy and political
science."[14]  Not only has he discovered the true theory of
government, but he is a statesman, a practical expert, able to
forecast the future and shape events.  He makes predictions, on the
average, twice a week, which always turn out right; he already claims,
during the early sessions of the Convention, to have made "three
hundred predictions on the leading points of the Revolution, all
justified by the event."[15] -- In the face of the Constituents who
demolish and reconstruct so slowly, he is sufficiently strong to take
down, put up and complete at a moment's notice.

"If I were one of the people's tribunes[16] and were supported by a
few thousand determined men, I answer for it that, in six weeks, the
Constitution would be perfected, the political machine well agoing,
and the nation free and happy.  In less than a year there would be a
flourishing, formidable government which would remain so as long as I
lived."- If necessary, he could act as commander-in-chief of the army
and always be victorious: having twice seen the Vendeans carry on a
fight he would end the war "at the first encounter."[17] -- "If I
could stand the march, I would go in person and carry out my views.
At the head of a small party of trusty troops the rebels could be
easily put down to the last man, and in one day.  I know something of
military art, and; without boasting, I can answer for success." -- On
any difficulty occurring, it is owing to his advice not having been
taken; he is the great political physician: his diagnosis from the
beginning of the Revolution is always correct, his prognosis
infallible, his therapeutics efficacious, humane and salutary.  He
provides the panacea and he should be allowed to prescribe it; only,
to ensure a satisfactory operation, he should himself administer the
dose.  Let the public lancet, therefore, be put in his hands that he
may perform the humanitarian operation of bloodletting.  "Such are my
opinions.  I have published them in my works.  I have signed them with
my name and I am not ashamed of it.  .  .  .  If you are not equal to
me and able to comprehend me so much the worse for you."[18] In other
words, in his own eyes, Marat is in advance of everybody else and,
through his superior genius and character, he is the veritable savior.

Such are the symptoms by which medical men recognize immediately one
of those partial lunatics who may not be put in confinement, but who
are all the more dangerous;[19] the malady, as they would express it
in technical terms, may be called the ambitious delirium, well known
in lunatic asylums.  --  Two predispositions, one an habitually
perverted judgment, and the other a colossal excess of self-
esteem,[20] constitute its sources, and nowhere are both more prolific
than in Marat.  Never did a man with such diversified culture, possess
such an incurably perverted intellect.  Never did a man, after so many
abortive speculations and such repeated malpractices, conceive and
maintain so high an opinion of himself.  Each of these two sources in
him augments the other: through his faculty of not seeing things as
they are, he attributes to himself virtue and genius; satisfied that
he possesses genius and virtue, he regards his misdeeds as merits and
his whims as truths.  - Thenceforth, and spontaneously, his malady
runs its own course and becomes complex; to the ambitious delirium
comes the persecution mania.  In effect, the evident or demonstrated
truths which he advances should strike the public at once; if they
burn slowly or miss fire, it is owing to their being stamped out by
enemies or the envious; manifestly, they have conspired against him,
and against him plots have never ceased.  First came the philosophers'
plot: when his treatise on "Man" was sent to Paris from Amsterdam,
"they felt the blow I struck at their principles and had the book
stopped at the custom-house."[21] Next came the plot of the doctors:
"they ruefully estimated my enormous gains.  Were it necessary, I
could prove that they often met together to consider the best way to
destroy my reputation." Finally, came the plot of the Academicians;
"the disgraceful persecution I had to undergo from the Academy of
Sciences for two years, after being satisfied that my discoveries on
Light upset all that it had done for a century, and that I was quite
indifferent about becoming a member of its body .  .  .  .  Would it
be believed that these scientific charlatans succeeded in underrating
my discoveries throughout Europe, in exciting every society of savants
against me, and in closing against me all the newspapers?"[22] -
Naturally, the would-be-persecuted man defends himself, that is to
say, he attacks.  Naturally, as he is the aggressor, he is repulsed
and put down, and, after creating imaginary enemies, he creates real
ones, especially in politics where, on principle, he daily preaches
insurrection and murder.  And finally, he is of course prosecuted,
convicted at the Chatelet court, tracked by the police, obliged to fly
and wander from one hiding-place to another; to live like a bat "in a
cellar, underground, in a dark dungeon;"[23] once, says his friend
Panis, he passed "six weeks sitting on his behind" like a madman in
his cell, face to face with his reveries.  - It is not surprising
that, with such a system, the reverie should become more intense, more
and more gloomy, and, at last settle down into a confirmed nightmare;
that, in his distorted brain, objects should appear distorted; that,
even in full daylight men and things should seem awry, as in a
magnifying, dislocating mirror; that, frequently, on the numbers (of
his journal) appearing too blood-thirsty, and his chronic disease too
acute, his physician should bleed him to arrest these attacks and
prevent their return.[24]

But it has become a habit: henceforth, falsehood grow in his brain as
if it was their native soil; planting himself on the irrational he
cultivates the absurd, even physical and mathematical.  "If we include
everyone;"[25] he says, "the patriotic tax-contribution of one-quarter
of all income will produce, at the very least, 4,860 millions, and
perhaps twice that sum." With this sum M. Necker may raise five
hundred thousand men, which he calculates on for the subjugation of
France.  - Since the taking of the Bastille, "the municipality's waste
alone amount to two hundred millions.  The sums pocketed by Bailly are
estimated at more than two millions; what 'Mottié' (Lafayette) has
taken for the past two years is incalculable."[26] - On the 15th of
November, 1791, the gathering of emigrés comprises "at least 120,000
former gentlemen and drilled partisans and soldiers, not counting the
forces of the German princes about to join them."[27] - Consequently,
as with his brethren in Bicêtre, (a lunatic asylum), he raves
incessantly on the horrible and the foul: the procession of terrible
or disgusting phantoms has begun.[28]  According to him, the scholars
who do not choose to admire him are fools, charlatans and plagiarists.
Laplace and Monge are even "automatons," so many calculating machines;
Lavoisier, "reputed father of every discovery causing a sensation in
the world, has not an idea of his own;" he steals from others without
comprehending them, and "changes his system as he changes his shoes."
Fourcroy, his disciple and horn-blower, is of still thinner stuff.
All are scamps: "I could cite a hundred instances of dishonesty by the
Academicians of Paris, a hundred breaches of trust;" twelve thousand
francs were entrusted to them for the purpose of ascertaining how to
direct balloons, and "they divided it among themselves, squandering it
at the Rapée, the opera and in brothels."[29] - In the political
world, where debates are battles, it is still worse.  Marat's
publication "The Friend of the people" has merely rascals for
adversaries.  Praise of Lafayette's courage and disinterestedness, how
absurd If he went to America it was because he was jilted, "cast off
by a Messalina;" he maintained a park of artillery there as "powder-
monkeys look after ammunition-wagons; " these are his only exploits;
besides, he is a thief.  Bailly is also a thief, and Mabuet a "clown."
Necker has conceived the "horrible project of starving and poisoning
the people; he has drawn on himself for all eternity the execration of
Frenchmen and the detestation of mankind." - What is the Constituent
Assembly but a set of "low, rampant, mean, stupid fellows?" -
"Infamous legislators, vile scoundrels, monsters athirst for gold and
blood, you traffic with the monarch, with our fortunes, with our
rights, with our liberties, with our lives! " - " The second
legislative corps is no less rotten than the first one." - In the
Convention, Roland, "the officious Gilles and the forger Pasquin, is
the infamous head of the monopolizers." " Isnard is a juggler, Buzot a
Tartuffe, Vergniaud a police spy."[30] - When a madman sees everywhere
around him, on the floor, on the walls, on the ceiling, toads,
scorpions, spiders, swarms of crawling, loathsome vermin, he thinks
only of crushing them, and the disease enters on its last stage: after
the ambitious delirium, the mania for persecution and the settled
nightmare, comes the homicidal mania.

With Marat, this broke out at the very beginning of the Revolution.
The disease was innate; he was inoculated with it beforehand.  He had
contracted it in good earnest, on principle; never was there a plainer
case of deliberate insanity.  - On the one hand, having derived the
rights of man from physical necessities, he concluded, "that society
owes to those among its members who have no property, and whose labor
scarcely suffices for their support, an assured subsistence, the
wherewithal to feed, lodge and clothe oneself suitably, provision for
attendance in sickness and when old age comes on, and for bringing up
children.  Those who wallow in wealth must (then) supply the wants of
those who lack the necessaries of life." Otherwise, "the honest
citizen whom society abandons to poverty and despair, reverts back to
the state of nature and the right of forcibly claiming advantages
which were only alienated by him to procure greater ones.  All
authority which is opposed to this is tyrannical, and the judge who
condemns a man to death (through it) is simply a cowardly
assassin."[31]

Thus do the innumerable riots which the dearth excites, find
justification, and, as the dearth is permanent, the daily riot is
legitimate.  - On the other hand, having laid down the principle of
popular sovereignty he deduces from this, "the sacred right of
constituents to dismiss their delegates; " to seize them by the throat
if they prevaricate, to keep them in the right path by fear, and wring
their necks should they attempt to vote wrong or govern badly.  Now,
they are always subject to this temptation.

 "If there is one eternal truth of which it is important to convince
man, it is that the mortal enemy of the people, the most to be dreaded
by them, is the Government."-- "Any minister who remains more than 2
days in office, once the ministry is able to plot against the country
is 'suspect.' "[32] - Bestir yourselves, then, ye unfortunates in town
and country, workmen without work, street stragglers without fuel or
shelter sleeping under bridges, prowlers along the highways, beggars,
tattered vagabonds, cripples and tramps, and seize your faithless
representatives! - On July 14th and October 5th and 6th, "the people
had the right not only to execute some of the conspirators in military
fashion, but to immolate them all, to put to the sword the entire body
of royal satellites leagued together for our destruction, the whole
herd of traitors to the country, of every condition and degree."[33]
Never go to the Assembly, "without filling your pockets with stones
and throwing them at the impudent scoundrels who preach monarchical
maxims;" "I recommend to you no other precaution but that of telling
their neighbors to look out."[34] - "We do not demand the resignation
of the ministers-we demand their heads.  We demand the heads of all
the cabinet officials in the Assembly, your mayor's, your general's,
the heads of most of the staff-officers, of most of the municipal
council, of the principal agents of the executive power in the
kingdom.  " - Of what use are half-way measures, like the sack of the
hotel de Castries?[35]

 "Avenge yourselves wisely! Death! Death! is the sole penalty for
traitors raging to destroy you It is the only one that strikes terror
into them.  Follow the example of your implacable enemies! Keep always
armed, so that they may not escape through the delays of the law! Stab
them on the spot or blow their brains out! " - " Twenty-four millions
of men shout in unison: If the black, gangrened, archi-gangrened
officials dare pass a bill reducing and reorganizing the army,
citizens, then you build eight hundred scaffolds in the Tuileries
garden and hang on them every traitor to his country - that infamous
Riquetti, Comte de Mirabeau, at the head of them - and, at the same
time, erect in the middle of the fountain basin a big pile of logs to
roast the ministers and their tools!"[36] - Could "the Friend of the
People" rally around him two thousand men determined "to save the
country, he would go and tear the heart out of that infernal Mottié in
the very midst of his battalions of slaves; he would go and burn the
monarch and his imps in his palace, impale the deputies on their
benches, and bury them beneath the flaming ruins of their den."[37]-
On the first cannon shot being fired on the frontier,

 "it is indispensable that the people should close the gates of the
towns and unhesitatingly make way with every priest, public
functionary and anti-revolutionary, known instigators and their
accomplices." - " It would be wise for the people's magistrates to
keep constantly manufacturing large quantities of strong, sharp,
short-bladed, double-edged knives, so as to arm each citizen known as
a friend of his country.  Now, the art of fighting with these terrible
weapons consists in this: Use the left arm as buckler, and cover it up
to the arm-pit with a sleeve quilted with some woollen stuff, filled
with rags and hair, and then rush on the enemy, the right hand
wielding the knife."[38] - Let us use these knives as soon as
possible, for "what means are now remaining for us to put an end to
the problems which overwhelm us? I repeat it, no other but executions
by the people."[39] - The Throne is at last down; but "be careful not
to give way to false pity! .  .  .  .  No quarter! I advise you to
decimate the anti-revolutionary members of the municipality, of the
justices of the peace, of the members of the departments and of the
National Assembly."[40] - At the outset, a few lives would have
sufficed: "five hundred heads ought to have fallen when the Bastille
was taken, and all would then have gone on well." But, through lack of
foresight and timidity, the evil was allowed to spread, and the more
it spread the larger the amputation should have been.  - With the
sure, keen eye of the surgeon, Marat gives its dimensions; he has made
his calculation beforehand.  In September, 1792, in the Council at the
Commune, he estimates forty thousand as the number of heads that
should be laid low.[41] Six weeks later, the social abscess having
enormously increased, the figures swell in proportion; he now demands
two hundred and seventy thousand heads,[42] always on the score of
humanity, "to ensure public tranquility," on condition that the
operation be entrusted to him, as the temporary enforcer of the
justice.  - Except for this last point, the rest is granted to him; it
is unfortunate that he could not see with his own eyes the complete
fulfillment of his programme, the batches condemned by the
revolutionary Tribunal, the massacres of Lyons and Toulon, the
drownings of Nantes.  - From the beginning to the end, he was in
keeping with the Revolution, lucid on account of his blindness, thanks
to his crazy logic, thanks to the concordance of his personal malady
with the public malady, to the early manifestation of his complete
madness in the midst of the incomplete or tardy madness of the rest,
he alone steadfast, remorseless, triumphant, perched aloft at the
first bound on the sharp pinnacle which his rivals dared not climb or
only stumbled up.

II.  Danton.

Danton.  - Richness of his faculties.  - Disparity between his
condition and instincts.  - The Barbarian.  - His work.  - His
weakness.

There is nothing of the madman about Danton; on the contrary, not only
is his intellect sound, but he possesses political aptitudes to an
eminent degree, and to such an extent that, in this particular, none
of his associates or adversaries compare with him, while, among the
men of the Revolution, only Mirabeau equals or surpasses him.  He is
an original, spontaneous genius and not, like most of his
contemporaries, a disputatious, quill-driving theorist,[43] that is to
say, a fanatical pedant, an artificial being composed of his books, a
mill-horse with blinkers, and turning around in a circle without an
issue.  His free judgment is not hampered by abstract prejudices: he
does not carry about with him a social contract, like Rousseau, nor,
like Siéyès, a social art and cabinet principles or combinations;[44]
he has kept aloof from these instinctively and, perhaps, through
contempt for them; he had no need of them; he would not have known
what to do with them.  Systems are crutches for the impotent, while he
is able-bodied; formulas serve as spectacles for the short-sighted,
while his eyes are good.  "He had read and meditated very little,"
says a learned and philosophical witness;[45] "his knowledge was
scanty and he took no pride in investigation; but he observed and saw
.  .  His native capacity, which was very great and not absorbed by
other things, was naturally closed to vague, complex and false
notions, and naturally open to every notion of experience the truth of
which was made manifest." Consequently, "his perceptions of men and
things, sudden, clear, impartial and true, were instinct with solid,
practical discretion." To form a clear idea of the divergent or
concordant dispositions, fickle or earnest, actual or possible, of
different parties and of twenty-six millions of souls, to justly
estimate probable resistances, and calculate available forces, to
recognize and take advantage of the one decisive moment, to combine
executive means, to find men of action, to measure the effect
produced, to foresee near and remote contingencies, to regret nothing
and take things coolly, to accept crimes in proportion to their
political efficacy, to dodge before insurmountable obstacles, even in
contempt of current maxims, to consider objects and men the same as an
engineer contracting for machinery and calculating horse-power[46] -
such are the faculties of which he gave proof on the 10th of August
and the 2nd of September, during his effective dictatorship between
the 10th of August and the 21st of September, afterwards in the
Convention, on the first Committee of Public Safety, on the 31st of
May and on the 2nd of June:[47] we have seen him busy at work.  Up to
the last, in spite of his partisans, he has tried to diminish or, at
least, not add to, the resistance the government had to overcome.
Nearly up to the last, in spite of his adversaries, he tried to
increase or, at least, not destroy the available forces of the
government.  In defiance of the outcries of the clubs, which clamor
for the extermination of the Prussians, the capture of the King of
Prussia, the overthrow of all thrones, and the murder of Louis XVI.,
he negotiated the almost pacific withdrawal of Brunswick;[48] he
strove to detach Prussia from the coalition;[49] he wanted to turn a
war of propaganda into one of interests;[50] he caused the Convention
to pass the decree that France would not in any way interfere with
foreign governments; he secured an alliance with Sweden; he prescribed
beforehand the basis of the treaty of Basle, and had an idea of saving
the King.[51]  In spite of the distrust and attacks of the Girondists,
who strove to discredit him and put him out of the way, he persists in
offering them his hand; he declared war on them only because they
refused to make peace,[52] and he made efforts to save them when they
were down.   Amidst so many ranters and scribblers whose logic is mere
words and whose rage is blind, who grind out phrases like a hand-
organ, or are wound up for murder, his intellect, always capacious and
supple, went right to facts, not to disfigure and pervert them, but to
accept them, to adapt himself to them, and to comprehend them.  With a
mind of this quality one goes far no matter in what direction; nothing
remains but to choose one's path.  Mandrin, under the ancient régime,
was also, in a similar way, a superior man;[53] only he chose the
highway.

Between the demagogue and the highwayman the resemblance is close:
both are leaders of bands and each requires an opportunity to organize
his band.  Danton, to organize his band, needed the Revolution.  - "Of
low birth, without patronage," penniless, every office being filled,
and "the Paris bar exorbitantly priced," admitted a lawyer after "a
struggle," he for a long time wandered jobless frequenting the coffee-
houses, the same as similar men nowadays frequent the bars.  At the
Café de l'École, the proprietor, a good natured old fellow "in a small
round wig, gray coat and a napkin on his arm," circulated among his
tables smiling blandly, while his daughter sat in the rear as
cashier.[54] Danton chatted with her and demanded her hand in
marriage.  To obtain her, he had to mend his ways, purchase an
attorneyship in the Court of the Royal Council and find guarantors and
sponsors in his small native town.[55]  Once married and lodged in the
gloomy Passage du Commerce, he finds himself "more burdened with debts
than with causes," tied down to a sedentary profession which demands
vigorous application, accuracy, a moderate tone, a respectable style
and blameless deportment; obliged to keep house on so small a scale
that, without the help of a louis regularly advanced to him each week
by his coffee-house father-in-law, he could not make both ends
meet.[56] His free-and-easy tastes, his alternately impetuous and
indolent disposition, his love of enjoyment and of having his own way,
his rude, violent instincts, his expansiveness, creativeness and
activity, all rebel against this life: he is ill-suited for the quiet
routine of our civil careers.  It is not the steady discipline of an
old society, but the tumultuous brutality of a society going to pieces
or in a state of formation, that suits him.  In temperament and
character he is a barbarian, and a barbarian born to command his
fellow-creatures, like this or that vassal of the sixth century or
baron of the tenth century.  A giant with the face of a " Tartar,"
pitted with the small-pox, tragically and terribly ugly, with a mask
convulsed like that of a growling "bull-dog,"[57] with small,
cavernous, restless eyes buried under the huge wrinkles of a
threatening brow, with a thundering voice and moving and acting like a
combatant, full-blooded, boiling over with passion and energy.  His
strength in its outbursts appears boundless like a force of nature,
when speaking he is roaring like a bull and be heard through closed
windows fifty yards off in the street, employing immoderate imagery,
intensely in earnest, trembling with indignation, revenge and
patriotic sentiments, able to arouse savage instincts in the most
tranquil breast and generous instincts in the most brutal
personalities.[58] He may be profane, using emphatic terms,[59]
cynical, but not monotonous and affected like Hébert, but spontaneous
and to the point, full of crude jests worthy of Rabelais, possessing a
stock of jovial sensuality and good-humor, cordial and familiar in his
ways, frank, friendly in tone.  He is, both outwardly and inwardly,
the best fitted for winning the confidence and sympathy of a Gallic,
Parisian populace.  His talents all contribute to "his inborn,
practical popularity," and to make of him "a grand-seignior of sans-
cullotterie."[60] - With such talents for acting, there is a strong
temptation to act it out the moment the theatre is ready, whatever the
theatre, even unlawful and murky, whatever the actors rogues,
scoundrels and loose women, whatever the part, ignoble, murderous, and
finally fatal to him who undertakes it.  - To hold out against such
temptation, would require a sentiment of repugnance which a refined or
thorough culture develops in both sense and mind, but which was
completely wanting in Danton.  Nothing disgusts him physically or
morally: he embraces Marat,[61] fraternizes with drunkards,
congratulates the Septembriseurs, retorts in blackguard terms to the
insults of prostitutes, treats reprobates, thieves and jail-birds as
equals, - Carra, Westermann, Huguenin, Rossignol and the confirmed
scoundrels whom he sends into the departments after the 2nd of
September.

 "Eh! What the hell! Do you think we ought to send young misses." [62]-

Garbage men are needed for the collection of garbage; one cannot hold
one's nose when they come for their wages; one must pay them well,
talk to them encouragingly, and leave them plenty of elbow room.
Danton is willing to play the part of the fire, and he humors vices;
he has no scruples, and lets people scratch and take.  - He has stolen
as much to give as to keep, to maintain his role as much as to benefit
by it, squaring accounts by spending the money of the Court against
the Court, probably inwardly chuckling, the same as the peasant in a
blouse on getting ahead of his well-duped landlord, or as the Frank,
whom the ancient historian describes as leering on pocketing Roman
gold the better to make war against Rome.  - The graft on this
plebeian seedling has not taken; in our modern garden this remains as
in the ancient forest; its vigorous sap preserves its primitive
raciness and produces none of the fine fruits of our civilization, a
moral sense, honor and conscience.  Danton has no respect for himself
nor for others; the nice, delicate limitations that circumscribe human
personality, seem to him as legal conventionality and mere drawing-
room courtesy.  Like a Clovis, he tramples on this, and like a Clovis,
equal in faculties, in similar expedients, and with a worse horde at
his back, he throws himself athwart society, to stagger along, destroy
and reconstruct it to his own advantage.

At the start, he comprehended the peculiar character and normal
procedure of the Revolution, that is to say, the useful agency of
popular brutality: in 1788 he had already figured in insurrections.
He comprehended from the first the ultimate object and definite result
of the Revolution, that is to say, the dictatorship of the violent
minority.  Immediately after the 14th of July," 1789, he organized in
his quarter of the city[63] a small independent republic, aggressive
and predominant, the center of the faction, a refuge for the riff-raff
and a rendezvous for fanatics, a pandemonium composed of every
available madcap, every rogue, visionary, shoulder-hitter, newspaper
scribbler and stump-speaker, either a secret or avowed plotter of
murder, Camille Desmoulins, Fréron, Hébert, Chaumette, Clootz,
Théroigne, Marat, -- while, in this more than Jacobin State, the model
in anticipation of that he is to establish later, he reigns, as he
will afterwards reign, the permanent president of the district,
commander of the battalion, orator of the club, and the concocter of
bold undertakings.  Here, usurpation is the rule there is no
recognition of legal authority; they brave the King, the ministers,
the judges, the Assembly, the municipality, the mayor, the commandant
of the National Guard.  Nature and principle raise them above the law;
the district takes Marat under its protection, posts two sentinels at
his door to protect him from prosecutions, and uses arms against the
armed force sent with a warrant to arrest him.[64]  yet more, in the
name of the city of Paris, "chief sentinel of the nation," they assume
to govern France: Danton betakes himself to the National Assembly and
declares that the citizens of Paris are the natural representatives of
the eighty-three departments, and summons it, on their injunction, to
cancel an act it has passed.[65] - The entire Jacobin conception is
therein expressed: Danton, with his keen insight, took it all in and
proclaimed it in appropriate terms; to apply it at the present time on
a grand scale,[66] he has merely to pass from the small theatre to the
large one, from the Cordeliers club to the Commune, to the Ministry,
and the Committee of Public Safety, and, in all these theatres, he
plays the same part with the same end in view and the same results.  A
despotism formed by conquest and maintained by terror, the despotism
of the Jacobin Parisian rabble, is the end to which he directly
marches.  He employs no other means and, adapting the means to the end
and the end to the means, manages the important days and instigates
the decisive measures of the Revolution: the 10th of August,[67] the
2nd of September, the 31st of May, the 2nd of June;[68] the decree
providing for an army of paid sans-culottes "to keep down aristocrats
with their pikes;" the decree in each commune where grain is dear,
taxing the rich to put bread within reach of the poor;[69] the decree
giving laborers forty sous for attending the meetings of the Section
Assemblies;[70] the institution of the revolutionary Tribunal;[71] the
proposal to erect the Committee of Public Safety into a provisional
government; the proclamation of Terror; the concentration of Jacobin
zeal on useful works; the employment of the eight thousand delegates
of the primary assemblies, who had been sent home as recruiting agents
for the universal armament;[72] the inflammatory expressions of young
men on the frontier; the wise resolutions for limiting the levy en
masse to men between eighteen and twenty-five, which put an end to the
scandalous songs and dances by the populace in the very hall of the
Convention.[73]

In order to set the machine up, he cleared the ground, fused the
metal, hammered out the principal pieces, filed off the blisters,
designed the action, adjusted the minor wheels, set it agoing and
indicated what it had to do, and, at the same time, he forged the
armor which guarded it against strangers and outside violence.  The
machine being his, why, after constructing it, did he not serve as its
engineer?

Because, if competent to construct it, he was not qualified to manage
it.  In a crisis, he may give a helping hand, win the support of an
assembly or a mob, direct, high-handedly and for a few weeks, an
executive committee.  But regular, persistent labor is repugnant to
him; he is not made for bookkeeping,[74] for paper and administrative
work.  Never, like Robespierre and Billaud can he attend to both
official and police duties at the same time, carefully reading minute
daily reports, annotating mortuary lists, extemporizing ornate
abstractions, coolly enunciating falsehoods and acting out the
patient, satisfied inquisitor; and especially, he can never become the
systematic executioner.  - On the one hand, his eyes are not obscured
by the gray veil of theory: he does not regard men through the
"Contrat-Social" as a sum of arithmetical units,[75] but as they
really are, living, suffering, shedding their blood, especially those
he knows, each with his peculiar physiognomy and demeanor.  Compassion
is excited by all this when one has any feeling, and he had.  Danton
had a heart; he bad the quick sensibilities of a man of flesh and
blood stirred by the primitive instincts, the good ones along with the
bad ones, instincts which culture had neither impaired nor deadened,
which allowed him to plan and permit the September massacre, but which
did not allow him to practice daily and blindly, systematic and
wholesale murder.  Already in September, "cloaking his pity under his
bellowing,"[76] he had shielded or saved many eminent men from the
butchers.  When the axe is about to fall on the Girondists, he is "ill
with grief" and despair.  "I am unable to save them," he exclaimed, "
and big tears streamed down his cheeks." - On the other hand, his eyes
are not covered by the bandage of incapacity or lack of fore-thought.
He detected the innate vice of the system, the inevitable and
approaching suicide of the Revolution.

 "The Girondists forced us to throw ourselves upon the sans-culotterie
which has devoured them, which will devour us, and which will eat
itself up."[77] - "Let Robespierre and Saint-Just alone, and there
will soon be nothing left in France but a Thebiad of political
Trappists."[78]  -- At the end, he sees more clearly still:

"On a day like this I organized the Revolutionary Tribunal: I ask
pardon for it of God and man.  - In Revolutions, authority remains
with the greatest scoundrels.  - It is better to be a poor fisherman
than govern men."[79]

But he has aspired to govern them; he constructed a new machine for
the purpose, and, deaf to its squeals, it worked in conformity with
the structure and the impulse he gave to it.  It towers before him,
this sinister machine, with its vast wheel and iron cogs grinding all
France, their multiplied teeth pressing out each individual life, its
steel blade constantly rising and falling, and, as it plays faster and
faster, daily exacting a larger and larger supply of human material,
while those who furnish this supply are held to be as insensible and
as senseless as itself.  This Danton cannot, will not be.  - He gets
out of the way, diverts himself, gambles,[80] forgets; he supposes
that the titular decapitators will probably consent to take no notice
of him; in any event they do not pursue him; "they would not dare do
it." " No one must lay hands on me, I am the ark." At the worst, he
prefers "to be guillotined rather than guillotine." - Having said or
thought this, he is ripe for the scaffold.



III.  Robespierre.

Robespierre.  - Mediocrity of his faculties.  - The Pedant.  -
Absence of ideas.  - Study of phrases.  -  Wounded self-esteem.  - His
infatuation.  - He plays victim.  - His gloomy fancies.  - His
resemblance to Marat.  -Difference between him and Marat.  - The
sincere hypocrite.  - The festival in honor of the Supreme Being, and
the law of Prairial 22.  - The external and internal characters of
Robespierre and the Revolution.

Even with the firm determination to remain decapitator-in-chief,
Danton could never be a perfect representative of the Revolution.  It
is an armed but philosophical robbery; its creed includes robbery and
assassination, but only as a knife in its sheath; the showy, polished
sheath is for public display, and not the sharp and bloody blade.
Danton, like Marat, lets the blade be too plainly visible.  At the
mere sight of Marat, filthy and slovenly, with his livid, frog-like
face, with his round, gleaming and fixed eyeballs, and his bold,
maniacal stare and steady monotonous rage, common-sense rebels; no-one
selects a homicidal maniac as a guide.  At the mere sight of Danton,
with his porter's vocabulary, his voice like an alarm bell of
insurrection, his cyclopean features and air of an exterminator,
humanity takes alarm; one does not surrender oneself to a political
butcher without repugnance.  The Revolution demands another
interpreter, like itself captivatingly fitted out, and Robespierre
fits the bill,[81] with his irreproachable attire, well-powdered hair,
carefully brushed coat,[82] strict habits, dogmatic tone, and formal,
studied manner of speaking.  No mind, in its mediocrity and
incompetence, so well harmonizes with the spirit of the epoch.  The
reverse of the statesman, he soars in empty space, amongst
abstractions, always mounted on a principle and incapable of
dismounting so as to see things practically.

"That bastard there," exclaims Danton, "is not even able to boil an
egg!"

 "The vague generalities of his preaching," writes another
contemporary,[83] "rarely culminated in any specific measure or legal
provision.  He combated everything and proposed nothing; the secret of
his policy happily accorded with his intellectual impotence and with
the nullity of his legislative conceptions." Once he has rattled his
revolutionary pedantry off, he no longer knows what to say.  - As to
financial matters and military art, he knows nothing and risks
nothing, except to underrate or calumniate Carnot and Cambon who did
know and who took risks.[84]  - In relation to a foreign policy his
speech on the state of Europe is the amplification of a schoolboy; on
exposing the plans of the English minister he reaches the pinnacle of
chimerical nonsense;[85] eliminate the rhetorical passages, and it is
not the head of a government who speaks, but the porter of the Jacobin
club.  On contemporary France, as it actually exists, he has not one
sound or specific idea: instead of men, he sees only twenty-six
millions simple robots, who, when duly led and organized, will work
together in peace and harmony.  Basically they are good,[86] and will,
after a little necessary purification, become good again.
Accordingly, their collective will is "the voice of reason and public
interest," hence, on meeting together, they are wise.  "The people's
assembly of delegates should deliberate, if possible, in the presence
of the whole body of the people;" the Legislative body, at least,
should hold its sittings "in a vast, majestic edifice open to twenty
thousand spectators." Note that for the past four years, in the
Constituent Assembly, in the Legislative Assembly, in the Convention,
at the Hotel de-Ville, in the Jacobin Club, wherever Robespierre
speaks, the galleries have never ceased to shout, yell and express
their opinion.  Such a positive, palpable experience would open
anybody's eyes; his are closed through prejudice or interest; even
physical truth finds no access to his mind, because he is unable to
comprehend it, or because he has to keep it out.  He must,
accordingly, be either obtuse or a charlatan.  Actually he is both,
for both combine to form the pedant (cuistre), that is to say, the
hollow, inflated mind which, filled with words and imagining that
these are ideas, revels in its own declamation and dupes itself that
it may dictate to others.

Such is his title, his personality and role.  In this artificial and
declamatory tragedy of the Revolution he takes the leading part; the
maniac and the barbarian slowly retire in the background on the
appearance of the cuistre; Marat and Danton finally become effaced, or
efface themselves, and the stage is left to Robespierre who attracts
all the attention.[87] - If we want to understand him we must look at
him as he stands in the midst of his surroundings.  At the last stage
of a dying intellectual vegetation, on the last branch of the
eighteenth century, he is the final freak and dried fruit of the
classical spirit.[88]  He has retained nothing of a worn-out system of
philosophy but its lifeless dregs and well-conned formulae, the
formulae of Rousseau, Mably, and Raynal, concerning "the people,
nature, reason, liberty, tyrants, factions, virtue, morality," a
ready-made vocabulary,[89] expressions too ample, the meaning of
which, ill-defined by the masters, evaporates in the hands of the
disciple.  He never tries to get at this; his writings and speeches
are merely long strings of vague abstract periods; there is no telling
fact in them, no distinct, characteristic detail, no appeal to the eye
evoking a living image, no personal, special observation, no clear,
frank original impression.  It might be said of him that he never saw
anything with his own eyes, that he neither could nor would see, that
false conceptions have intervened and fixed themselves between him and
the object;[90] he combines these in logical sequence, and simulates
the absent thought by an affected jargon, and this is all.  The other
Jacobins alongside of him likewise use the same scholastic jargon; but
none of them spout and spread out so complacently and lengthily as he.
For hours, we grope after him in the vague shadows of political
speculation, in the cold and perplexing mist of didactic generalities,
trying in vain to make something out of his colorless tirades, and we
grasp nothing.[91]  When we, in astonishment, ask ourselves what all
this talk amounts to, and why he talks at all; the answer is, that he
has said nothing and that he talks only for the sake of talking, the
same as a sectarian preaching to his congregation, neither the
preacher nor his audience ever wearying, the one of turning the
dogmatic crank, and the other of listening.  So much the better if the
container is empty; the emptier it is the easier and faster the crank
turns.  And better still, if the empty term he selects is used in a
contrary sense; the sonorous words justice, humanity, mean to him
piles of human heads, the same as a text from the gospels means to a
grand inquisitor the burning of heretics.  - Through this extreme
perversity, the cuistre spoils his own mental instrument; thenceforth
he employs it as he likes, as his passions dictate, believing that he
serves truth in serving these.

Now, his first passion, his principal passion, is literary vanity.
Never was the chief of a party, sect or government, even at critical
moments, such an incurable, insignificant rhetorician, so formal, so
pompous, and so dull.  - On the eve of the 9th of Thermidor, when it
was a question of life or death, he enters the tribune with a set
speech, written and re-written, polished and re-polished,[92]
overloaded with studied ornaments and bits for effect,[93] coated by
dint of time and labor, with the academic varnish, the glitter of
symmetrical antitheses, rounded periods, exclamations, omissions,
apostrophes and other tricks of the pen.[94] - In the most famous and
important of his reports,[95] I have counted eighty-four instances of
personifications[96] imitated from Rousseau and the antique, many of
them largely expanded, some addressed to the dead, to Brutus, to young
Barra, and others to absentees, priests, and aristocrats, to the
unfortunate, to French women, and finally to abstract substantives
like Liberty and Friendship.  With unshaken conviction and intense
satisfaction, he deems himself an orator because he harps on the same
old tune.  There is not one true tone in his elaborate eloquence,
nothing but recipes and only those of a worn-out art, Greek and Roman
common-places, Socrates and the hemlock, Brutus and his dagger,
classic metaphors like "the flambeaux of discord," and "the vessel of
State,"[97]s coupled together and beauties of style which a pupil in
rhetoric aims at on the college bench;[98]times a grand bravura air,
so essential for parade in public;[99] centimes a delicate strain of
the flute, for, in those days, one must have a tender heart;[100] in
short, Marmontel's method in " Belisarius," or that of Thomas in his
"Eloges," all borrowed from Rousseau, but of inferior quality, like a
sharp, thin voice strained to imitate a rich, powerful voice.  All is
a sort of involuntary parody, and the more repulsive because a word
ends in a blow, because a sentimental, declamatory Trissotin poses as
statesman, because the studied elegance of the closet become pistol
shots aimed at living breasts, because an epithet skillfully directed
sends a man to the guillotine.  - The contrast is too great between
his talent and the part he plays.  With such a talent, as mediocre and
false as his intellect, there is no employment for which he is less
suited than that of governing men; he was cut out for another, which,
in a peaceable community, he would have been able to do.  Suppress the
Revolution, and Marat would have probably ended his days in an asylum.
Danton might possibly have become a legal filibuster, a highwayman or
gangster, and finally throttled or hung.  Robespierre, on the
contrary, might have continued as he began,[101] a busy, hard-working
lawyer of good standing, member of the Arras Academy, winner of
competitive prizes, author of literary eulogies, moral essays and
philanthropic pamphlets; his little lamp, lighted like hundreds of
others of equal capacity at the focus of the new philosophy, would
have burned moderately without doing harm to any one, and diffused
over a provincial circle a dim, commonplace illumination proportionate
to the little oil his lamp would hold.

But the Revolution bore him into the Constituent Assembly, where, for
a long time on this great stage, his amour propre, the dominant
feeling of the pedant, suffered terribly.  He had already suffered on
this score from his earliest youth, and his wounds being still fresh
made him only the more sensitive.  - Born in Arras in 1758, orphaned
and poor, protégé of his bishop, a bursar through favor at the college
Louis-le-Grand, later a clerk with Brissot under the revolutionary
system of law-practice, and at length settled down in his gloomy rue
des Rapporteurs as a pettifogger.  Living with a bad-tempered sister,
he has adopts Rousseau, whom he had once seen and whom he ardently
studies, for his master in philosophy, politics and style.  Fancying,
probably, like other young men of his age and condition, that he could
play a similar part and thus emerge from his blind alley, he published
law pleadings for effect, contended for Academy prizes, and read
papers before his Arras colleagues.  His success was moderate: one of
his harangues obtained a notice in the Artois Almanac; the Academy of
Metz awarded him only a second prize; that of Amiens gave him no
prize, while the critic of the "Mercure" spoke of his style as
smacking of the provinces.  - In the National Assembly, eclipsed by
men of great and spontaneous ability, he remains a long time in the
shade, and, more than once, through obstination or lack of tact, makes
himself ridiculous.  With his sharp, thin, attorney's visage, "dull,
monotonous, coarse voice and wearisome delivery," - " an artesian
accent " and constrained air,[102] his constantly putting himself
forward, his elaboration of commonplaces, his evident determination to
impose on cultivated people, still a body of intelligent listeners,
and the intolerable boredom he caused them - all this is not
calculated to render the Assembly indulgent to errors of sense and
taste.[103]  One day, referring to certain acts of the "Conseil:" "It
is necessary that a noble and simple formula should announce national
rights and carry respect for law into the hearts of the people.
Consequently, in the decrees as promulgated, after the words Louis, by
the grace of God," etc., these words should follow:

"People, behold the law imposed on you! Let this law be considered
sacred and inviolable for all!" Upon this, a Gascon deputy arises and
remarks in his southern accent, "Gentlemen, this style is unsuitable -
there is no need for sermons.[104] (cantique)."

General laughter; Robespierre keeps silent and bleeds internally: two
or three such mishaps nettle such a man from head to foot.  It is not
that his stupid remarks seem silly to him; no pedant taken in the act
and hissed would avow that he deserved such treatment; on the
contrary, he is content to have spoken as becomes a philosophic and
moral legislator, and so much the worse for the narrow minds and
corrupt hearts unable to comprehend him.- Thrown back upon himself,
his wounded vanity seeks inward nourishment and takes what it can find
in the sterile uniformity of his bourgeois moderation.  Robespierre,
unlike Danton, has no cravings.  He is sober; he is not tormented by
his senses; if he gives way to them, it is only no further than he can
help, and with a bad grace.  In the rue Saintonge in Paris, "for seven
months," says his secretary,[105] "I knew of but one woman that he
kept company with, and he did not treat her very well.   .  .  very
often he would not let her enter his room": when busy, he must not be
disturbed.  He is naturally steady, hard-working, studious and fond of
seclusion, at college a model pupil, at home in his province an
attentive advocate, a punctual deputy in the Assembly, everywhere free
of temptation and incapable of going astray.  - "Irreproachable" is
the word which from early youth an inward voice constantly repeats to
him in low tones to console him for obscurity and patience.  Thus has
he ever been, is now, and ever will be; he says this to himself, tells
others so, and on this foundation, all of a piece, he builds up his
character.  He is not, like Desmoulins, to be seduced by dinners, like
Barnave, by flattery, like Mirabeau and Danton, by money, like the
Girondists, by the insinuating charm of ancient politeness and select
society, like the Dantonists, by the bait of joviality and unbounded
license - he is the incorruptible.  He is not to be deterred or
diverted, like the Feuillants, Girondists, and Dantonists, like
statesmen or specialists, by considerations of a lower order, by
regard for interests or respect for acquired positions, by the danger
of undertaking too much at once, by the necessity of not disorganizing
the service and of giving play to human passions, motives of utility
and opportunity: he is the uncompromising champion of the right.[106]
"Alone, or nearly alone, I do not allow myself to be corrupted; alone
or nearly alone, I do not compromise justice; which two merits I
possess in the highest degree.  A few others may live correctly, but
they oppose or betray principles; a few others profess to have
principles, but they do not live correctly.  No one else leads so pure
a life or is so loyal to principles; no one else joins to so fervent a
worship of truth so strict a practice of virtue: I am the unique." -
What can be more agreeable than this mute soliloquy? From the very
first day it can be heard toned down in Robespierre's address to the
Third-Estate of Arras;[107] the last day it is spoken aloud in his
great speech in the Convention;[108] during the interval, it crops out
and shines through all his compositions, harangues, or reports, in
exordiums, parentheses and perorations, permeating every sentence like
the drone of a bag-pipe.[109]  - Through the delight he takes in this
he can listen to nothing else, and it is just here that the outward
echoes supervene and sustain with their accompaniment the inward
cantata which he sings to his own glory.  Towards the end of the
Constituent Assembly, through the withdrawal or the elimination of
every man at all able or competent, he becomes one of the conspicuous
tenors on the political stage, while in the Jacobin Club he is
decidedly the tenor most in vogue.  - "Unique competitor of the Roman
Fabricius," writes the branch club at Marseilles to him; "immortal
defender of popular rights," says the Jacobin crew of Bourges.[110]
One of two portraits of him in the exhibition of 1791 bears the
inscription: "The Incorruptible." At the Moliere Theatre a drama of
the day represents him as launching the thunderbolts of his logic and
virtue at Rohan and Condé.  On his way, at Bapaume, the patriots of
the place, the National Guard on the road and the authorities, come in
a body to honor the great man.  The town of Arras is illuminated on
his arrival.  On the adjournment of the Constituent Assembly the
people in the street greet him with shouts, crown him with oak
wreaths, take the horses from his cab and drag him in triumph to the
rue St.  Honoré, where he lodges with the carpenter Duplay.  - Here,
in one of those families in which the semi-bourgeois class borders on
the people, whose minds are unsophisticated, and on whom glittering
generalities and oratorical tirades take full hold, he finds his
worshippers; they drink in his words; they have the same opinion of
him that he has of himself; to every person in the house, husband,
wife and daughter, he is the great patriot, the infallible sage; he
bestows benedictions night and morning; he inhales clouds of incense;
he is a god at home.  The faithful, to obtain access to him form a
line in the court.[111] One by one they are admitted into the
reception room, where they gather around portraits of him drawn with
pencil, in stump, in sepia and in water color, and before miniature
busts in red or gray plaster.  Then, on the signal being given by him,
they penetrate through a glass door into the sanctuary where he
presides, into the private closet in which the best bust of him, with
verses and mottoes, replaces him during his absence.  - His
worshippers adore him on their knees, and the women more than the men.
On the day he delivers his apology before the Convention "the passages
are lined with women[112] .  .  .  .  seven or eight hundred of them
in the galleries, and but two hundred men at most;" and how
frantically they cheer him! He is a priest surrounded by
devotees."[113] In the Jacobin club, when he delivers his "amphigory,"
there are sobs of emotion, "outcries and stamping of feet almost
making the house tumble."[114] An onlooker who shows no emotion is
greeted with murmurs and obliged to slip out, like a heretic that has
strayed into a church on the elevation of the Host.  - The faster the
revolutionary thunderbolts fall on other heads, so does Robespierre
mount higher and higher in glory and deification.  Letters are
addressed to him as "the founder of the Republic, the incorruptible
genius who foresees all and saves all, who can neither be deceived nor
seduced;"[115] who has "the energy of a Spartan and the eloquence of
an Athenian;"[116] "who shields the Republic with the aegis of his
eloquence;"[117] who "illuminates the universe with his writings,
fills the world with his renown and regenerates the human species here
below;"[118] whose" name is now, and will be, held in veneration for
all ages, present and to come;"[119] who is "the Messiah promised by
the Eternal for universal reform."[120] An extraordinary popularity,"
says Billaud-Varennes,[121] a popularity which, founded under the
Constituent Assembly, "only increased during the Legislative
Assembly," and, later on, so much more, that, "in the National
Convention he soon found himself the only one able to fix attention on
his person.  .  .  .  and control public opinion.  .  .  .  With this
ascendancy over public opinion, with this irresistible preponderance,
when he reached the Committee of Public Safety, he was already the
most important being in France." After three years, a chorus of a
thousand voices,[122] which he formed and directs, repeats again and
again in unison his litany, his personal creed, a hymn of three
stanzas composed by him in his own honor, and which he daily recites
to himself in a low tone of voice, and often in a loud one:

 "Robespierre alone has discovered the best type of citizen!
Robespierre alone, modestly and without shortcomings, fits the
description! Robespierre alone is worthy of and able to lead the
Revolution!"[123]

Cool infatuation carried thus far is equivalent to a raging fever, and
Robespierre almost attains to the ideas and the ravings of Marat.

First, in his own eyes, he, like Marat, is a persecuted man, and, like
Marat, he poses himself as a "martyr," but more skillfully and keeping
within bounds, affecting the resigned and tender air of an innocent
victim, who, offering himself as a sacrifice, ascends to Heaven,
bequeathing to mankind the imperishable souvenir of his virtues.[124]

 "I arouse against me the pride of everybody;[125] I sharpen against
me a thousand daggers.  I am a sacrifice to every species of hatred.
.  .  .  It is certain that my head will atone for the truths I have
uttered.  I have given my life, and shall welcome death almost as a
boon.  It is, perhaps, Heaven's will that my blood should indicate the
pathway of my country to happiness and freedom.  With what joy I
accept this glorious destiny!"[126] -

"It is hardly in order to live that one declares war against tyrants,
and, what is still more dangerous, against miscreants.  .  .  .  The
greater their eagerness to put an end to my career here below, the
more eager I shall be to fill it with actions serving the welfare of
my fellow-creatures."[127]

 "All these offenders outrage me;[128] actions which to others may
appear insignificant or completely legitimate are for me crimes.  As
soon as someone becomes acquainted with me he is at once calumniated.
Others are forgiven for their fortune, my zeal is considered a crime.
Deprive me of my conscience and I am the most wretched of men.  I do
not even enjoy the rights of a citizen.  I am not even allowed to
perform my duty as a representative of the people.  .  .  .  To the
enemies of my country, to whom my existence seems an obstacle to their
heinous plots, I am ready to sacrifice it, if their odious empire is
to endure.  .  .  .  .  Let their road to the scaffold be the pathway
of crime, ours shall be that of virtue; let the hemlock be got ready
for me, I await it on this hallowed spot.  I shall at least bequeath
to my country an example of constant affection for it, and to the
enemies of humanity the disgrace of my death."

Naturally, and always just like Marat, he sees around himself only "
the perverted, the plotters, the traitors."[129] - Naturally, as with
Marat, common sense with him is perverted, and, like Marat again, he
thinks at random.

 "I am not obliged to reflect," said he to Garat, "I always rely on
first impressions."

"For him," says the same authority, "the best reasons are
suspicions,"[130] and naught makes headway against suspicions, not
even the most positive evidence.  On September 4, 1792, talking
confidentially with Pétion, and hard pressed with the questions that
he put to him, he ends by saying, "Very well, I think that Brissot is
on Brunswick's side."[131] - Naturally, finally, he, like Marat,
imagines the darkest fictions, but they are less improvised, less
grossly absurd, more slowly worked out and more industriously
interwoven in his calculating inquisitorial brain.

"Evidently," he says to Garat, "the Girondists are conspiring."[132]

"And where?" demands Garat.

"Everywhere," Robespierre replies, "in Paris, throughout France, over
all Europe.  Gensonné, at Paris, is plotting in the Faubourg St.
Antoine, going about among the shopkeepers and persuading them that we
patriots mean to pillage their shops.  The Gironde (department) has
for a long time been plotting its separation from France so as to join
England; the chiefs of its deputation are at the head of the plot, and
mean to carry it out at any cost.  Gensonné makes no secret of it; he
tells all among them who will listen to him that they are not
representatives of the nation, but plenipotentiaries of the Gironde.
Brissot is plotting in his journal, which is simply a tocsin of civil
war; we know of his going to England, and why he went; we know all
about his intimacy with that Lebrun, minister of foreign affairs, a
Liegois and creature of the Austrian house.  Brissot's best friend is
Clavière, and Clavière has plotted wherever he could breathe.  Rabaut,
treacherous like the Protestant and philosopher that he is, was not
clever enough to conceal his correspondence with that courtier and
traitor Montesquiou; six months ago they were working together to open
Savoy and France to the Piedmontese.  Servan was made general of the
Pyrenean army only to give the keys of France to the Spaniards."

"Is there no doubt of this in your mind?" asks Garat.

 "None, whatever."[133]

Such assurance, equal to that of Marat, is terrible and worse in its
effect, for Robespierre's list of conspirators is longer than that of
Marat.  Political and social, in Marat's mind, the list comprehends
only aristocrats and the rich; theological and moral in Robespierre's
mind, it comprehends all atheists and dishonest persons, that is to
say, nearly the whole of his party.  In this narrow mind, given up to
abstractions and habitually classifying men under two opposite
headings, whoever is not with him on the good side is against him on
the bad side, and, on the bad side, the common understanding between
the factious of every flag and the rogues of every degree, is natural.

"All aristocrats are corrupt, and every corrupt man is an aristocrat;"
for, "republican government and public morality are one and the same
thing."[134]

Not only do evil-doers of both species tend through instinct and
interest to league together, but their league is already perfected.
One has only to open one's eyes to detect "in all its extent" the plot
they have hatched, "the frightful system of destruction of public
morality."[135] Guadet, Vergniaud, Gensonné, Danton, Hébert, "all of
them artificial characters," had no other end in view : "they
felt[136] that, to destroy liberty, it was necessary to favor by every
means whatever tended to justify egoism, wither the heart and efface
that idea of moral beauty, which affords the only rule for public
reason in its judgment of the defenders and enemies of humanity." -
Their heirs remain; but let those be careful.  Immorality is a
political offense; one conspires against the State merely by making a
parade of materialism or by preaching indulgence, by acting
scandalously, or by following evil courses, by stock-jobbing, by
dining too sumptuously; by being vicious, scheming, given to
exaggeration, or "on the fence;" by exciting or perverting the people,
by deceiving the people, by finding fault with the people, by
distrusting the people,[137] short, when one does not march straight
along on the prescribed path marked out by Robespierre according to
principles: whoever stumbles or turns aside is a scoundrel, a traitor.
Now, not counting the Royalists, Feuillantists, Girondists,
Hébertists, Dantonists, and others already decapitated or imprisoned
according to their merit, how many traitors still remain in the
Convention, on the Committees, amongst the representatives on mission,
in the administrative bodies not properly weeded out, amongst petty
tyrannical underlings and the entire ruling, influential class at
Paris and in the provinces? Outside of "about twenty political
Trappists in the Convention," outside of a small devoted group of pure
Jacobins in Paris, outside of a faithful few scattered among the
popular clubs of the departments, how many Fouchés, Vadiers, Talliens,
Bourdons, Collots, remain amongst the so-called revolutionaries? How
many dissidents are there, disguised as orthodox, charlatans disguised
as patriots, and pashas disguised as sans-culottes?[138] Add all this
vermin to that which Marat seeks to crush out; it is no longer by
hundreds of thousands, but by millions.  exclaim Baudot, Jeanbon-
Saint-André and Guffroy, that the guilty must be counted and cut off
their heads! - And all these heads, Robespierre, according to his
maxims, must strike off.  He is well aware of this; hostile as his
intellect may be to precise ideas, he, when alone in his closet, face
to face with himself, sees clearly, as clearly as Marat.  Marat's
chimera, on first spreading out its wings, bore its frenzied rider
swiftly onward to the charnel house; that of Robespierre, fluttering
and hobbling along, reaches the goal in its turn; in its turn, it
demands something to feed on, and the rhetorician, the professor of
principles, begins to assess the voracity of the monstrous brute on
which he is mounted.  Slower than the other, this one is still more
ravenous, for, with similar claws and teeth, it has a vaster appetite.
At the end of three years Robespierre has overtaken Marat, at that
distant end of the line, at the station where Marat had established
himself from the very beginning, and the theoretician now adopts the
policy, the aim, the means, the work, and almost the vocabulary of a
maniac:[139]

armed dictatorship of the urban mob,
systematic perturbation of the bribed rabble,
war against the bourgeoisie,
extermination of the rich,

placing opposition writers, administrators and deputies outside the
law.

Both monsters get the same food; only, to the ration of his monster,
Robespierre adds "vicious men" as its special and favorite prey.
Henceforth, he may in vain abstain from action, take refuge in his
rhetoric, stop his chaste ears, and raise his hypocritical eyes to
heaven, he cannot avoid seeing or hearing under his immaculate feet
the streaming gore, and the bones crashing in the open jaws of the
insatiable monster which he has fashioned and on which he rides.[140]
These ever open and hungry jaws must be daily fed with an ampler
supply of human flesh; not only is he bound to let it eat, but to
furnish the food, often with his own hands, except that he must
afterwards wash them, declaring, and even believing, that no spot of
blood has ever soiled them.  He is generally content to caress and
flatter the brute, to excuse it, to let it go on.  Nevertheless, more
than once, tempted by the opportunity, he has launched it against his
designated victim.[141]  He is now himself starting off in quest of
living prey; he casts the net of his rhetoric[142] around it; he
fetches it bound to the open jaws; he thrusts aside with an
uncompromising air the arms of friends, wives and mothers, the
outstretched hands of suppliants begging for lives;[143] he suddenly
throttles the struggling victims[144] and, for fear that they might
escape, he strangles them in time.  Near the end, this is no longer
enough; the brute must have grander quarries, and, accordingly, a pack
of hounds, beaters-up, and, willingly or not, it is Robespierre who
equips, directs and urges them on, at Orange, at Paris,[145] ordering
them to empty the prison's, and be expeditious in doing their work.  -
In this profession of slaughtering, destructive instincts, long
repressed by civilization, become aroused.  His feline physiognomy, at
first "that of a domestic cat, restless but mild, changes into the
savage appearance of the wildcat, and close to the ferocious exterior
of the tiger.  In the Constituent Assembly he speaks with a whine, in
the Convention he froths at the mouth."[146]  The monotonous drone of
a stiff sub-professor changes into the personal accent of furious
passion; he hisses and grinds his teeth;[147] Sometimes, on a change
of scene, he affects to shed tears.[148]  But his wildest outbursts
are less alarming than his affected sensibility.  The festering
grudges, corrosive envies and bitter scheming which have accumulated
in his breast are astonishing.  The gall bladder is full, and the
extravasated gall overflows on the dead.  He never tires of re-
executing his guillotined adversaries, the Girondists, Chaumette,
Hébert and especially Danton,[149] probably because Danton was the
active agent in the Revolution of which he was simply the incapable
pedagogue; he vents his posthumous hatred on this still warm corpse in
artful insinuations and obvious misrepresentations.  Thus, inwardly
corroded by the venom it distills, his physical machine gets out of
order, like that of Marat, but with other symptoms.  When speaking in
the tribune "his hands crisp with a sort of nervous contraction;"
sudden tremors agitate "his shoulders and neck, shaking him
convulsively to and fro."[150] "His bilious complexion becomes livid,"
his eyelids quiver under his spectacles, and how he looks! "Ah," said
a Montagnard, "you would have voted as we did on the 9th of Thermidor,
had you seen his green eyeballs !" "Physically as well as morally," he
becomes a second Marat, suffering all the more because his delirium is
not steady, and because his policy, being a moral one, forces him to
exterminate on a grander scale.

But he is a discreet Marat, of a timid temperament, anxious,[151]
keeping his thoughts to himself, made for a school-master or a
pleader, but not for taking the lead or for governing, always acting
hesitatingly, and ambitious to be rather the pope, than the dictator
of the Revolution.[152]  Above all, he wants to remain a political
Grandison[153]; until the very end, he keeps his mask, not only in
public but also to himself and in his inmost conscience.  The mask,
indeed, has adhered to his skin; he can no longer distinguish one from
the other; never did an impostor more carefully conceal intentions and
acts under sophisms, and persuade himself that the mask was his face,
and that in telling a lie, he told the truth.

Taking his word for it, he had nothing to do with the September
events.[154]  "Previous to these events, he had ceased to attend the
General Council of the Commune.  .  .  He no longer went there." He
was not charged with any duty, he had no influence there; he had not
provoked the arrest and murder of the Girondists.[155]  All he did was
to "speak frankly concerning certain members of the Committee of
Twenty-one;" as "a magistrate" and "one of a municipal assembly."
Should he not" explain himself freely on the authors of a dangerous
plot?" Besides, the Commune "far from provoking the 2nd of September
did all in its power to prevent it." After all, only one innocent
person perished, "which is undoubtedly one too many.  Citizens, mourn
over this cruel mistake; we too have long mourned over it! But, as all
things human come to an end, let your tears cease to flow." When the
sovereign people resumes its delegated power and exercises its
inalienable rights, we have only to bow our heads.  - Moreover, it is
just, wise and good "in all that it undertakes, all is virtue and
truth; nothing can be excess, error or crime."[156]  It must intervene
when its true representatives are hampered by the law "let it assemble
in its sections and compel the arrest of faithless deputies."[157]
What is more legal than such a motion, which is the only part
Robespierre took on the 31st of May.  He is too scrupulous to commit
or prescribe an illegal act.  That will do for the Dantons, the
Marats, men of relaxed morals or excited brains, who if need be, tramp
in the gutters and roll up their shirt-sleeves; as to himself, he can
do nothing that would ostensibly derange or soil the dress proper to
an honest man and irreproachable citizen.  In the Committee of Public
Safety, he merely executes the decrees of the Convention, and the
Convention is always free.  He a dictator! He is merely one of seven
hundred deputies, and his authority, if he has any, is simply the
legitimate ascendancy of reason and virtue.[158] He a murderer! If he
has denounced conspirators, it is the Convention which summons these
before the revolutionary Tribunal,[159] and the revolutionary Tribunal
pronounces judgment on them.  He a terrorist! He merely seeks to
simplify the established proceedings, so as to secure a speedier
release of the innocent, the punishment of the guilty, and the final
purgation that is to render liberty and morals the order of the
day.[160] - Before uttering all this he almost believes it, and, when
he has uttered it he believes it fully.[161]  When nature and history
combine, to produce a character, they succeed better than man's
imagination.  Neither Molière in his "Tartuffe," nor Shakespeare in
his " Richard III.," dared bring on the stage a hypocrite believing
himself sincere, and a Cain that regarded himself as an Abel.[162]
There he stands on a colossal stage, in the presence of a hundred
thousand spectators, on the 8th of June, 1794, the most glorious day
of his life, at that fête in honor of the Supreme Being, which is the
glorious triumph of his doctrine and the official consecration of his
papacy.  Two characters are found in Robespierre, as in the Revolution
which he represents: one, apparent, paraded, external, and the other
hidden, dissembled, inward, the latter being overlaid by the former.
- The first one all for show, fashioned out of purely cerebral
cogitations, is as artificial as the solemn farce going on around him.
According to David's programme, the cavalcade of supernumeraries who
file in front of an allegorical mountain, gesticulate and shout at the
command, and under the eyes, of Henriot and his gendarmes,[163]
manifesting at the appointed time the emotions which are prescribed
for them.  At five o'clock in the morning

"friends, husbands, wives, relations and children will embrace .  .  .
.  The old man, his eyes streaming with tears of joy, feels himself
rejuvenated."

At two o'clock, on the turf-laid terraces of the sacred mountain,

 "all will show a state of commotion and excitement: mothers here
press to their bosoms the infants they suckle, and there offer them up
in homage to the author of Nature, while youths, aglow with the ardor
of battle, simultaneously draw their swords and hand them to their
venerable fathers.  Sharing in the enthusiasm of their sons, the
deported old men embrace them and bestow on them the paternal
benediction.  .  .  .  .  All the men distributed around the 'Field of
Reunion' sing in chorus the (first) refrain.  .  .  .   All the Women
distributed around the 'Field of Reunion' sing in unison the (second)
refrain .  .  .  .  All Frenchmen partake of each other's sentiments
in one grand fraternal embrace."

What could better than such an idyll, ruled with an iron hand, in the
presence of moral symbols and colored pasteboard divinities, could
better please the counterfeit moralist, unable to distinguish the
false from the true, and whose skin-deep sensibility is borrowed from
sentimental authors! "For the first time" his glowing countenance
beams with joy, while "the enthusiasm"[164] of the scribe overflows,
as usual, in book phraseology.

 "Behold!" he exclaims, "that which is most interesting in humanity!
The Universe is here assembled! O, Nature, how sublime, how exquisite
is thy power! How tyrants must quail at the contemplation of this
festival !"

Is not he himself its most dazzling ornament? Was not he unanimously
chosen to preside over the Convention and conduct the ceremonies? Is
he not the founder of the new cult, the only pure worship on the face
of the earth, approved of by morality and reason? Wearing the uniform
of a representative, nankeen breeches, blue coat, tri-colored sash and
plumed hat,[165] holding in his hand a bouquet of flowers and grain,
he marches at the head of the Convention and officiates on the
platform; he sets fire to the veil which hides from view the idol
representing "Atheism," and suddenly, through an ingenious
contrivance, the majestic statue of "Wisdom" appears in its place.  He
then addresses the crowd, over and over again, exhorting,
apostrophizing, preaching, elevating his soul to the Supreme Being,
and with what oratorical combinations! What an academic swell of
bombastic cadences, strung together to enforce his tirades! How
cunning the even balance of adjective and substantive![166] From these
faded rhetorical flowers, arranged as if for a prize distribution or a
funeral oration, exhales a sanctimonious, collegiate odor which he
complacently breathes, and which intoxicates him.  At this moment, he
must certainly be in earnest; there is no hesitation or reserve in his
self-admiration; he is not only in his own eyes a great writer and
great orator, but a great statesman and great citizen his artificial,
philosophic conscience awards him only praise.  - But look underneath,
or rather wait a moment.  Signs of impatience and antipathy appear
behind his back: Lecointre has braved him openly; numerous insults,
and, worse than these, sarcasms, reach his ears.  On such an occasion,
and in such a place! Against the pontiff of Truth, the apostle of
Virtue! The miscreants, how dare they! Silent and pale, he suppresses
his rage, and,[167] losing his balance, closing his eyes, he plunges
headlong on the path of murder: cost what it will, the miscreants must
perish and without loss of time.  To expedite matters, he must get
their heads off quietly, and as "up to this time things have been
managed confidentially in the Committee of Public Safety," he, alone
with Couthon, two days after, without informing his colleagues,[168]
draws up, brings to the Convention, and has passed the terrible act of
Prairial which places everybody's life at his disposal.  - In his
crafty, blundering haste, he has demanded too much; each one, on
reflection, becomes alarmed for himself; he is compelled to back out,
to protest that he is misunderstood, admit that representatives are
excepted, and, accordingly, to sheathe the knife he has already
applied to his adversaries throats.  But he still holds it in his
grasp.  He watches them, and, pretending to retreat, affects a
renunciation, crouched in his corner,[169] waiting until they
discredit themselves, so as to spring upon them a second time.   He
has not to wait long, for the exterminating machine he set up on the
22nd of Prairial, is in their hands, and it has to work as he planned
it, namely, by making rapid turns and almost haphazard: the odium of a
blind sweeping massacre rests with them; he not only makes no
opposition to this, but, while pretending to abstain from it, he urges
it on.  Secluded in the private office of his secret police, he orders
arrests;[170] he sends out his principal bloodhound, Herman; he first
signs and then dispatches the resolution by which it is supposed that
there are conspirators among those in confinement and which,
authorizing spies or paid informers, is to provide the guillotine with
those vast batches which purge and clean prisons out in a trice."[171]
-  "I am not responsible," he states later on .  .  .  ." My lack of
power to do any good, to arrest the evil, forced me for more than six
weeks to abandon my post on the Committee of Public Safety."[172]  To
ruin his adversaries by murders committed by him, by those which he
makes them commit and which he imputes to them, to whitewash himself
and blacken them with the same stroke of the brush, what intense
delight! If the natural conscience murmurs in whispers at moments, the
acquired superposed conscience immediately imposes silence, concealing
personal hatreds under public pretexts: the guillotined, after all,
were aristocrats, and whoever comes under the guillotine is immoral.
Thus, the means are good and the end better; in employing the means,
as well as in pursuing the end, the function is sacerdotal.

Such is the scenic exterior of the Revolution, a specious mask with a
hideous visage beneath it, under the reign of a nominal humanitarian
theory, covering over the effective dictatorship of evil and low
passions.  In its true representative, as in itself, we see ferocity
issuing from philanthropy, and, from the pedant (cuistre), the executioner.
___________________________________________________________________


Notes:

[1] Harmand (de la Meuse): "Anecdotes relatives à la Revolution." "He
was dressed like a tough cab-driver.  He had a disturbed look and an
eye always in motion; he acted in an abrupt, quick and jerky way.  A
constant restlessness gave a convulsive contraction to his muscles and
features which likewise affected his manner of walking so that he
didn't walk but hopped."

[2] Chevremont, "Jean Paul Marat;" also Alfred Bougeard, "Marat"
passim.  These two works, with numerous documents, are panegyrics of
Marat.- Bougeat, I., II (description of Marat by Fabre d'Eglantine);
II., 259 and I., 83.  - "Journal de la Republique Française," by
Marat, No.93, January 9, 1793.  " I devote only two out of the twenty
four hours to sleep, and only one hour to my meals, toilette and
domestic necessities.  .  .  I have not taken fifteen minutes
recreation for more than three years."

[3] Chevremont, I., pp.  I and 2.  His family, on the father's side,
was Spanish, long settled in Sardinia.  The father, Dr.  Jean Mara,
had abandoned Catholicism and removed to Geneva where he married a
woman of that city; he afterwards established himself in the canton of
Neufchatel.

[4] "Journal de la République Française" No.98, description of "l'Ami
du peuple" by himself.

[5] Read his novel "Les Aventures du jeune comte Potowski," letter 5,
by Lucile: "I think of Potowski only.  My imagination, inflamed at the
torch of love, ever presents to me his sweet image." Letter of
Potowski after his marriage.  "Lucile now grants to love all that
modesty permits .  .  .   enjoying such transports of bliss, I believe
that the gods are jealous of my lot."

[6] Preface, XX.  "Descartes, Helvetius, Haller, Lelat all ignored
great principles; Man, with them, is an enigma, an impenetrable
secret." He says in a foot-note, "We find evidence of this in the
works of Hume, Voltaire, Bonnet, Racine and Pascal."

[7] "Mémoires Académiques sur la Lumière," pref., VII.  -- He
especially opposes "the differential refrangibility of heterogeneous
rays" which is "the basis of Newton's theory."

[8] Chevremont, I., 74.  (See the testimony of Arago, Feb.24, 1844).

[9] Ibid., I., 104.  (Sketch of a declaration of the rights of man and
of the citizen).

[10] See the epigraph of his "Mémoires sur la Lumiere." "They will
force their way against wind and tide." - Ibid., preface, VII.
"Déconvertes de Monsieur Marat," 1780, 2nd ed., p.  140.

[11] "Recherches physiques sur l'electricité," 1782, pp.13, 17.

[12] Chevremont, I., 59.

[13] "De l'Homme," preface VII.  and book IV.

[14] "Journal de la République Française," No 98.

[15] "Journal de la République Française," by Marat, No.  I.

[16] " L'Ami du Peuple" No.  173.  (July 26, 1790).  The memories of
conceited persons, given to immoderate self-expansion, are largely at
fault.  I have seen patients in asylums who, believing in their
exalted position, have recounted their successes in about the same
vein as Marat.  (Chevremont, I., 40, 47, 54).  "The reports of
extraordinary cures effected by me brought me a great crowd of the
sick.  The street in front of my door was blocked with carriages.
People came to consult me from all quarters.  .  .  .  The abstract of
my experiments on Light finally appeared and it created a prodigious
sensation throughout Europe; the newspapers were all filled with it.
I had the court and the town in my house for six months.  .  .  .  The
Academy, finding that it could not stifle my discoveries tried to make
it appear that they had emanated from its body." Three academic bodies
came in turn the same day to see if he would not present himself as a
candidate.  - "Up to the present time several crowned heads have
sought me and always on account of the fame of my works."

[17] "Journal de la République Française," July 6 1793.

[18] Moniteur, (Session of the Convention, Sep.25, 1792).  Marat,
indeed, is constantly claiming the post of temporary dictator.
("L'Ami du peuple," Nos.  258, 268, 466, 668 and "Appel à la nation,"
p.53).

[19] Moniteur, (Session of the Convention, Sep.25, 1792).  Marat,
indeed, is constantly claiming the post of temporary dictator.
("L'Ami du peuple," Nos.  258, 268, 466, 668 and "Appel à la nation,"
p.53).

[20] Moniteur, (Session of the Convention, Sep.25, 1792).  Marat,
indeed, is constantly claiming the post of temporary dictator.
("L'Ami du peuple," Nos.  258, 268, 466, 668 and "Appel à la nation,"
p.53).

[21] Chevremont, I., 40.  (Marat's letters, 1793).

[22] Journal de la Republique Française, No.98.

[23] The words of Marat and Panes.  (Chevremont, I., 197, 203; also
"The Revolution" II., 290, 2nd note).

[24] Michelet, "Histoire de la Révolution," II., 89.  (Narrated by M.
Bourdier, Marat's physician, to M. Serre, the physiologist).
Barbaroux, "Mémoires," 355, (after a visit to Marat): "You should see
how superficially Marat composed his articles.  Without any knowledge
of a public man he would ask the first person he met what he thought
of him and this he wrote down, exclaiming 'I'll crush the rascal!'"

[25] Chevremont, I., 361.  (From a pamphlet against Necker, by Marat,
July, 1790).

[26] "L'Ami du Peuple," No.552.  (August 30, 1791).

[27] Ibid., No.626.  (Dec.  15, 1791).  Cf.  "The Revolution," II.,
129, on the number of armed emigrés.  At this date the authorized
number as published is four thousand.

[28] His filthy imputations cannot be quoted.  See in Buchez et Roux,
IX., 419 (April 26, 1791), and X., 220 (Nos.  for June 17, 19 and 21),
his statement against Lafayette; again, his list with its vile
qualifications of "rascals and rogues," who are canvassing for
election, and his letters on the Academicians.

[29] Buchez et Roux, X., 407 (Sept., 1791).  - Cf.  ibid., 473.
According to Marat, "it is useless to measure a degree of the
meridian; the Egyptians having already given this measure.  The
Academicians "obtained an appropriation of one thousand crowns for the
expenses of this undertaking, a small cake which they have fraternally
divided amongst themselves."

[30] Chevremont, I., 238-249.  "L'Ami du peuple," Nos.  419, 519, 543,
608, 641.  Other falsehoods just as extravagant are nearly all
grotesque.  No.630, (April 15, 1792).  "Simonneau, mayor of d'Etampes,
is an infamous ministerial monopolizer." - No.  627, (April 12, 1792).
Delessart, the minister, "accepts gold to let a got-up decree be
passed against him." No.  650, (May 10, 1792).  "Louis XVI.  desired
war only to establish his despotism on an indestructible foundation."

[31] Chevremont, I., 106.  (Draft of a declaration of the rights of
man and of the citizen, 1789).  - Ibid., I., 196.

[32] "L'Ami du peuple," Nos.  24 and 274.  - Cf.  "Placard de Marat,"
Sept.  18, 1792.  "The National Convention should always be under the
eye of the people, so that the people may stone it if it neglects its
duty."

[33] "L'Ami du peuple," Nos.  108-111.  (May 20-23, 1790).

[34] Ibid., No.258.  (Oct.22, 1790).

[35] Ibid., No.286 (Nov.  20, I790).

[36] Ibid., No.  198 (August 22, 1790).

[37] Ibid., Nos.  523 and 524 (July 19 and 20, 1791).

[38] Ibid., No.626 (Dec.  15, 1791).

[39] Ibid., No.668 (July 8, 1792).  - Cf.  No.  649 (May 6, 1792).  He
approves of the murder of General Dillon by his men, and recommends
the troops everywhere to do the same thing.

[40] Ibid., No.677 (August 10, 1792).  See also subsequent numbers,
especially No.  680, Aug.  19th, for hastening on the massacre of the
Abbaye prisoners.  And Aug.  21st: "As to the officers, they deserve
to be quartered like Louis Capet and his manège toadies."

[41] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 105.  (Letter of Chevalier Saint-Dizier,
member of the first committee of Surveillance, Sep.10, 1792.) -
Michelet, II., 94.  (In December, 1790, he already demands twenty
thousand heads).

[42] Moniteur, Oct.  26, 1792.  (Session of the Convention, Oct.
24th.) "N - : I know a member of the convention, who heard Marat say
that, to ensure public tranquility, two hundred and seventy thousand
heads more should fall."

Vermont:       "I declare that Marat made that
                statement in my presence."

Marat:         "Well, I did say so; that's my
                opinion and I say it again." -

Up to the last he advocates surgical operations.  (No.  for July 12,
1793, the eve of his death.) Observe what he says on the anti-
revolutionaries.  "To prevent them from entering into any new military
body I had proposed at that time, as an indispensable prudent measure,
cutting off their ears, or rather their thumbs." He likewise had his
imitators.  (Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 186, Session of the Convention,
April 4, 1796.) Deputies from the popular club of Cette "regret that
they had not followed his advice and cut off three hundred thousand heads."

[43] Danton never wrote or printed a speech.   "I am no writer," he
says.  (Garat, Memoires," 31.)

[44] Garat, "Memoires," III.: "Danton had given no serious study to
those philosophers who, for a century past, had detected the
principles of social art in human nature.  He had not sought in his
own organization for the vast and simple combinations which a great
empire demands.  He had that instinct for the grand which constitutes
genius and that silent circumspection which constitutes judgment."

[45] Garat, ibid., 311, 312.

[46] The head of a State may be considered in the same light as the
superintendent of an asylum for the sick, the demented and the infirm.
In the government of his asylum he undoubtedly does well to consult
the moralist and the physiologist; but, before following out their
instructions he must remember that in his asylum its inmates,
including the keepers and himself, are more or less ill, demented or
infirm.

[47] De Sybel: "Histoire de l'Europe pendant la Revolution Française,"
(Dosquet's translation from the German) II., 303.  "It can now be
stated that it was the active operations of Danton and the first
committee of Public Safety which divided the coalition and gave the
Republic the power of opposing Europe .  .  .  We shall soon see, on
the contrary, that the measures of the "Mountain" party, far from
hastening the armaments, hindered them."

[48] Ibid., I., 558, 562, 585.  (The intermediaries were Westermann
and Dumouriez.)

[49] 2 Ibid., II., 28, 290, 291, 293.

[50] Buchez et Roux, XXV., 445.  (Session of April 13, 1793.)

[51] According to a statement made by Count Theodore de Lameth, the
eldest of the four brothers Lameth and a colonel and also deputy in
the Legislative Assembly.  During the Assembly he was well acquainted
with Danton.  After the September massacre he took refuge in
Switzerland and was put on the list of emigrants.  About a month
before the King's death he was desirous of making a last effort and
came to Paris.  "I went straight to Danton's house, and, without
giving my name, insisted on seeing him immediately.  Finally, I was
admitted and I found Danton in a bath-tub.  "You here! "he exclaimed.
"Do you know that I have only to say the word and send you to the
guillotine?" "Danton," I replied, "you are a great criminal, but there
are some vile things you cannot do, and one of them is to denounce
me." " You come to save the King?" "Yes." We then began to talk in a
friendly and confidential way.  "I am willing," said Danton, "to try
and save the King, but I must have a million to buy up the necessary
votes and the money must be on hand in eight days.  I warn you that
although I may save his life I shall vote for his death; I am quite
willing to save his head but not to lose mine." M. de Lameth set
about raising the money; he saw the Spanish ambassador and had the
matter broached to Pitt who refused.  Danton, as he said he would,
voted for the King's death, and then aided or allowed the return of M.
de Lameth to Switzerland.  (I have this account through M (probably
Pasquier)..  .  .  who had it from count Theodore de Lameth's own
lips.)

[52] Garat.  "Memoires," 317.  "Twenty times, he said to me one day, I
offered them peace.  They did not want it.  They refused to believe me
in order to reserve the right of ruining me."

[53] Cf.  the "Ancient Regime," p.  501.

[54] "Danton," by Dr.  Robinet, passim.  (Notices by Béon, one of
Danton's fellow-disciples.  - Fragment by Saint-Albin.) - " The
Revolution," II., p.35, foot-note.

[55] Emile Bos, "Les Avocats du conseil du Roi," 515, 520.  (See
Danton's marriage-contract and the discussions about his fortune.
From 1787 to 1791, he is found engaged as counsel only in three
cases.)

[56] Madame Roland, "Memoires." (Statement of Madame Danton to Madame
Roland.)

[57] Expressions used by Garat and Rderer.  - Larévilliere-Lepaux
calls him "the Cyclop."

[58] Fauchet describes him as "the Pluto of Eloquence."

[59] Riouffe, "Mémoires sur les prisons." In prison every utterance
was mingled with oaths and gross expressions."

[60] Terms used by Fabre d'Eglantine and Garat.  - Beugnot, a very
good observer, had an accurate impression of Danton ("Mémoires", I,
249-252).  - M. Dufort de Cheverney, (manuscript memoirs published by
M. Robert de Crèveceur), after the execution of Babeuf, in 1797, had
an opportunity to hear Samson, the executioner, talk with a war
commissary, in an inn between Vendôme and Blois.  Samson recounted the
last moments of Danton and Fabre d'Églantine.  Danton, on the way to
the scaffold, asked if he might sing.  "There is nothing to hinder,"
said Samson.  "All right.  Try to remember the verses I have just
composed," and he sang the following to a tune in vogue:

   Nous sommes menés au trépas       We are led to our death
   Par quantité de scélérats,        by a gang of scoundrels
   c'est ce qui nous désole.         that makes us sad.
   Mais bientot le moment viendra    But soon the time shall come
   Où chacun d'eux y passera,        when all of them shall follow
   c'est ce qui nous console."       that's our consolation.

[61] Buchez et Roux, XXI., 108.  Speech (printed) by Pétion: "Marat
embraced Danton and Danton embraced him.  I certify that this took
place in my presence."

[62] Buchez et Roux, XXI., 126.  ("To Maximilian Robespierre and his
royalists," a pamphlet by Louvet.) - Beugnot, "Mémoires," I., 250, "On
arriving in Paris as deputy from my department (to the Legislative
Assembly) Danton sought me and wanted me to join his party.  I dined
with him three times, in the Cour du Commerce, and always went away
frightened at his plans and energy.  .  .  .  He contented himself by
remarking to his friend Courtois and my colleague: 'Thy big Beugnot is
nothing but a devotee - you can do nothing with him.'"

[63] The Cordeliers district.  (Buchez et Roux, IV., 27.) Assembly
meeting of the Cordeliers district, November 11th, 1789, to sanction
Danton's permanent presidency.  He is always re-elected, and
unanimously.  This is the first sign of his ascendancy, although
sometimes, to save the appearance of his dictatorship, he has his
chief clerk Paré elected, whom he subsequently made minister.

[64] Buchez et Roux, IV., 295, 298, 401; V., 140.

[65] Ibid., VIII., 28 (October, 1790).

[66] Ibid., IX., 408: X., 144, 234, 297, 417.  - Lafayette "Mémoires,"
I., 359, 366.  Immediately after Mirabeau's death (April, 1791)
Danton's plans are apparent, and his initiative is of the highest
importance.

[67] "The Revolution," II., 238 (Note) and 283.  - Garat, 309: "After
the 20th of June everybody made mischief at the chateau; the power of
which was daily increasing.  Danton arranged the 10th of August and
the chateau was thunderstruck." - Robinet: "Le Procès des
Dantonistes," 224, 229.  ("Journal de la Societé des amis de la
Constitution," No.  214, June 5, 1792.) Danton proposes "the law of
Valerius Publicola, passed in Rome after the expulsion of the
Tarquins, permitting every citizen to kill any man convicted of having
expressed opinions opposed to the law of the State, except in case of
proof of the crime." (Ibid., Nos.  230 and 231, July 13, 1792.) Danton
induces the federals present "to swear that they will not leave the
capital until liberty is established, and before the will of the
department is made known on the fate of the executive power." Such are
the principles and the instruments, of "August 10th"  and "September
2nd."

[68] Garat, 314.  "He was present for a moment on the committee of
Public Safety.  The outbreaks of May 31st and June 2nd occurred; he
was the author of both these days."

[69] Decrees of April 6 and 7, 1793.

[70] Decree of September 5, 1793.

[71] Decree of March 10, 1793.

[72] August 1 and 12, 1793.

[73] See "The Revolution," vol.  III., ch.  I.-Buchez et Roux, XXV.,
285.  (Meeting of Nov.26, 1793.) - Moniteur, XIX., 726.  Danton (March
16, 1794) secures the passing of a decree that "hereafter prose only
shall be heard at the rostrum of the house."

[74] Archives Nationales, Papers of the committee of General Security,
No 134.  - Letter of Delacroix to Danton, Lille, March 25, 1793, on
the situation in Belgium, and the retreat of Dumouriez.  .  .  .  "My
letter is so long I fear that you will not read it to the end.  .  .
.Oblige me by forgetting your usual indolence." -- Letter of Chabot to
Danton, Frimaire 12, year II.  " I know your genius, my dear
colleague, and consequently your natural indolent disposition.  I was
afraid that you would not read me through if I wrote a long letter.
Nevertheless I rely on your friendship to make an exception in my
favor."

[75] Lagrange, the mathematician, and senator under the empire, was
asked how it was that he voted for the terrible annual conscriptions.
"It had no sensible effect on the tables of mortality," he replied.

[76] Garat, 305, 310, 313.  " His friends almost worshipped him."

[77] Ibid., 317.  - Thibeaudeau, "Mémoires," I., 59.

[78] Quinet, "La Révolution," II., 304.  (According to the unpublished
memoirs of Baudot.) These expressions by Danton's friends all bear the
mark of Danton himself.  At all events they express exactly his ideas.

[79] Riouffe, 67.

[80] Miot de Melito, " Mémoires," I., 40, 42.  - Michelet, " Histoire
de la Révolution Française," VI., 34; V.  178, 184.  (On the second
marriage of Danton in June, 1793, to a young girl of sixteen.  On his
journey to Arcis, March, 1794.) - Riouffe, 68.  In prison "He talked
constantly about trees, the country and nature."

[81] We can trace the effect of his attitude on the public in the
police reports, especially at the end of 1793, and beginning of the
year 1794.  (Archives Nationales, F 7, 31167 report of Charmont,
Nivôse 6, year II.) "Robespierre gains singularly in public
estimation, especially since his speech in the Convention, calling on
his colleagues to rally and crush out the monsters in the interior,
also in which he calls on all to support the new revolutionary
government with their intelligence and talents.  .  .  .  I have to
state that I have everywhere heard his name mentioned with admiration.
They wound up by saying that it would be well for all members of the
Convention to adopt the measures presented by Robespierre." - (Report
of Robin, Nivôse 8.) "Citizen Robespierre is honored everywhere, in
all groupes and in the cafe's.  At the Café Manouri it was given out
that his views of the government were the only ones which, like the
magnet, would attract all citizens to the Revolution.  It is not the
same with citizen Billaud-Varennes." (Report of the Purveyor, Nivôse
9.) " In certain clubs and groups there is a rumor that Robespierre is
to be appointed dictator..  .  .  .  The people do justice to his
austere virtues; it is noticed that he has never changed his opinions
since the Revolution began."

[82] "Souvenirs d'un déporté." by P.  Villiers, (Robespierre's
secretary for seven months in 1790,) p.  2.  "Of painstaking
cleanliness." - Buchez et Roux, XXXIV., 94.  Description of
Robespierre, published in the newspapers after his death: "His clothes
were exquisitely clean and his hair always carefully brushed."

[83] D'Hericault, "La Revolution du 9 Thermidor," (as stated by
Daunou).  - Meillan, "Mémoires," p.4.  "His eloquence was nothing but
diffusive declamation without order or method, and especially with no
conclusions.  Every time he spoke we were obliged to ask him what he
was driving at.....  Never did he propose any remedy.  He left the
task of finding expedients to others, and especially to Danton."

[84] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 437, 438, 440, 442.  (Speech by
Robespierre, Thermidor 8, year II.)

[85] Ibid., XXX., 225, 226, 227, 228 (Speech, Nov.  17, 1793), and
XXXI., 255 (Speech, Jan.26, '794).  "The policy of the London Cabinet
largely contributed to the first movement of our Revolution....
Taking advantage of political tempests (the cabinet) aimed to effect
in exhausted and dismembered France a change of dynasty and to place
tke Duke of York on the throne of Louis XVI.  ..  .  Pitt....is an
imbecile, whatever may be said of a reputation that has been much too
greatly puffed up.  A man who, abusing the influence acquired by him
on an island placed haphazard in the ocean, is desirous of contending
with the French people, could not have conceived of such an absurd
plan elsewhere than in a madhouse." - Cf.  Ibid., XXX., 465.

[86] Ibid., XXVI., 433, 441, (Speech on the Constitution, May 10,
1793); XXXI., 275.  "Goodness consists in the people preferring itself
to what is not itself; the magistrate, to be good, must sacrifice
himself to the people.".  .  .  .  "Let this maxim be first adopted
that the people are good and that its delegates are corruptible.".  .
.  XXX., 464.  (Speech, Dec.25, 1793): "The virtues are the appanages
of the unfortunate and the patrimony of the people."

[87] Cf.  passim, Hamel, "Histoire de Robespierre," 3 vols.  An
elaborate panegyric full of details.  Although eighty years have
elapsed, Robespierre still makes dupes of people through his attitudes
and rhetorical flourishes.  M. Hamel twice intimates his resemblance
to Jesus Christ.  The resemblance, indeed, is that of Pascal's Jesuits
to the Jesus of the Gospel.

[88] "The Ancient Regime," p.262.

[89] Garat, "Mémoires," 84.  Garat who is himself an ideologist, notes
"his eternal twadle about the rights of man, the sovereignty of the
people, and other principles which he was always talking about, and on
which he never gave utterance to one precise or fresh idea."

[90] Read especially his speech on the constitution, (May 10, 1793),
his report on the principles of Republican Government, (Dec.15, 1793),
his speech on the relationship between religious and national ideas
and republican principles (May 7, 1794) and speech of Thermidor 8.-
Carnot: "Memoires," II., 512.  "In all deliberations on affairs he
contributed nothing but vague generalities."

[91] During this century all important Jacobin leaders, Hitler,
Mussolini, Lenin, Stalin, Castro etc.  have in their turn followed
robespierre's example and bored their captive audiences with their
interminable speeches.  (SR).

[92] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 406.  (Speech delivered Thermidor 8th.)
The printed copy of the manuscript with corrections and erasures.

[93] Ibid., 420, 422, 427.

[94] Ibid., 428, 435, 436.  "O day forever blessed! What a sight to
behold, the entire French people assembled together and rendering to
the author of nature the only homage worthy of him! How affecting each
object that enchants the eye and touches the heart of man! O honored
old age! O generous ardor of the young of our country! O the innocent,
pure joy of youthful citizens! O the exquisite tears of tender
mothers! O the divine charms of innocence and beauty! What majesty in
a great people happy in its strength, power and virtue!" - "No,
Charmette, No, death is not the sleep of eternity!" - "Remember, O,
People, that in a republic, etc." - "If such truths must be dissembled
then bring me the hemlock!"

[95] Speech, May 7, 1794.  (On moral and religious ideas in relation
to republican principles.)

[96] Personifications.  From Greek to make persons.  (SR).

[97] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 436.  "The verres and Catilines of our
country." (Speech of Thermidor 8th.) - Note especially the speech
delivered March 7, 1794, crammed full of classical reminiscences.

[98] Ibid., XXXIII., 421.  "Truth has touching and terrible accents
which reverberate powerfully in pure hearts as in guilty consciences,
and which falsehood can no more counterfeit than Salome can
counterfeit the thunders of heaven." - 437: "Why do those who
yesterday predicted such frightful tempests now gaze only on the
fleeciest clouds? Why do those who but lately exclaimed 'I affirm that
we are treading on a volcano' now behold themselves sleeping on a bed
of roses?"

[99] Ibid., XXXII., 360, 361.  (Portraits of the encyclopaedists and
Hébertists.)

[100] Ibid., XXXIII., 408.  "Here, I have to open my heart." - XXXII.,
475-478, the concluding part.

[101] Hamel: "Histoire de Robespierre," I., 34-76.  An attorney at 23,
a member of the Rosati club at Arras at 24, a member of the Arras
Academy at 25.  The Royal Society of Metz awarded him a second prize
for his discourse against the prejudice which regards the relatives of
condemned criminals as infamous.  His eulogy of Gresset is not crowned
by the Amiens Academy.  He reads before the Academy of Arras a
discourse against the civil incapacities of illegitimate children, and
then another on reforms in criminal jurisprudence.  In 1789, he is
president of the Arras Academy, and publishes an eulogy of Dupaty and
an address to the people from Artois on the qualities necessary for
future deputies.

[102] See his eulogy of Rousseau in the speech of May 7, 1794.
(Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 369.  - Garat, 85.  "I hoped that his
selection of Rousseau for a model of style and the constant reading of
his works would exert some good influence on his character."

[103] Fievée, "correspondance" (introduction).  Fievée, who heard him
at the Jacobin Club, said that he resembled a "tailor of the ancient
regime." La Réeveillère-Lepeaux, ´"Mmoires." - Buchez et Roux, XXXIV.,
94.  - Malouet, "Mémoires," II., 135.  (Session of May 31, 1791, after
the delivery of Abbé Raynal's address.) "This is the first and only
time I found Robespierre clear and even eloquent.  .  .  .  He spun
out his opening phrases as usual, which contained the spirit of his
discourse, and which, in spite of his accustomed rigmarole, produced
the effect he intended."

[104] Courrier de Provence, III., No.  52, (Oct.  7 and 8, 1789).  -
Buchez et Roux, VI., 372.  (Session of July 10, 1790.) Another similar
blunder was committed by him on the occasion of an American
deputation.  The president had made his response, which was
"unanimously applauded." Robespierre wanted to have his say
notwithstanding the objections of the Assembly, impatient at his
verbiage, and which finally put him down.  Amidst the laughter, "M.
l'Abbé Maury demands ironically the printing of M. Robespierre's
discourse."

[105] L.  Villiers, 2.

[106] Cf.  his principal speeches in the constituent Assembly; --
against martial law; against the veto, even suspensive; against the
qualification of the silver marc and in favor of universal suffrage;
in favor of admitting into the National Guard non-acting citizens; of
the marriage of priests; of the abolition of the death penalty; of
granting political rights to colored men; of interdicting the father
from favoring any one of his children; of declaring the "Constituants"
ineligible to the Legislative Assembly, etc.  On royalty: "The King is
not the representative but the clerk of the nation." On the danger of
allowing political rights to colored men: "Let the colonies perish if
they cost you your honor, your glory, your liberty!"

[107] Hamel, I., 76.77, (March, 1789).  "My heart is an honest one and
I stand firm; I have never bowed beneath the yoke of baseness and
corruption." He enumerates the virtues that a representative of the
Third Estate should possess (26, 83).  He already shows his blubbering
capacity and his disposition to regard himself as a victim: "They
undertake making martyrs of the people's defenders.  Had they the
power to deprive me of the advantages they envy, could they snatch
from me my soul and the consciousness of the benefits I desire to
confer on them."

[108] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII.  "Who am I that am thus accused? The
slave of freedom, a living martyr to the Republic, at once the victim
and the enemy of crime!" See this speech in full.

[109] Especially in his address to the French people, (Aug., 1791),
which, in a justificatory form, is his apotheosis.  - Cf.  Hamel, II.,
212; Speech in the Jacobin club, (April 27, 1792).

[110] Hamel, I., 517, 532, 559; II., 5.

[111] Laréveillère-Lepeaux," Mémoires." - Barbaroux, "Mémoires," 358.
(Both, after a visit to him.)

[112] Robespierre's devotees constantly attend at the Jacobin club and
in the convention to hear him speak and applaud him, and are called,
from their condition and dress, " the fat petticoats."

[113] Buchez et Roux, XX., 197.  (Meeting of Nov.  I, 1792.) -
"Chronique de Paris," Nov.  9, 1792, article by Condorcet.  With the
keen insight of the man of the world, he saw clearly into
Robespierre's character.  "Robespierre preaches, Robespierre censures;
he is animated, grave, melancholy, deliberately enthusiastic and
systematic in his ideas, and conduct.  He thunders against the rich
and the great; he lives on nothing and has no physical necessities.
His sole mission is to talk, and this he does almost constantly.  .  .
His characteristics are not those of a religious reformer, but of the
chief of a sect.  He has won a reputation for austerity approaching
sanctity.  He jumps up on a bench and talks about God and Providence.
He styles himself the friend of the poor; he attracts around him a
crowd of women and 'the poor in spirit, and gravely accepts their
homage and worship.  .  .  .  Robespierre is a priest and never will
be anything else." Among Robespierre's devotees Madame de Chalabre
must be mentioned, (Hamel, I., 525), a young widow (Hamel, III., 524),
who offers him her hand with an income of forty thousand francs.
"Thou art my supreme deity," she writes to him, "and I know no other
on this earth! I regard thee as my guardian angel, and would live only
under thy laws."

[114] Fievée, "Correspondance," (introduction).

[115] Report of Courtois on the papers found in Robespierre's
domicile.  Justificatory documents No.20, letter of the Secretary of
the Committee of Surveillance of Saint Calais, Nivôse 15, year II.

[116] Ibid., No.  18.  Letter of V---, former inspector of "droits
reservés," Feb.  5, 1792.

[117] Ibid., No.8.  Letter of P.  Brincourt, Sedan, Aug.29, 1793.

[118] Ibid., No.  I.  Letter of Besson, with an address of the popular
club of Menosque, Prairial 23, year II

[119] Ibid., No.14.  Letter of D---, member of the Cordeliers Club,
and former mercer, Jan.31, 1792

[120] Ibid., No.12.  Letter by C----, Chateau Thierry, Prairial 30,
year II.

[121] Hamel, III., 682.  (Copied from Billaud-Varennes' manuscripts,
in the Archives Nationales).

[122] Moniteur, XXII., '75.  (Session of Vendémiaire i8, year III.
Speech by Laignelot.) "Robespierre had all the popular clubs under his
thumb."

[123] Garat, 85.  "The most conspicuous sentiment with Robespierre,
and one, indeed, of which he made no mystery, was that the defender of
the people could never see amiss.  - (Bailleul, quoted in Carnot's
Memoirs, I.  516.) "He regarded himself as a privileged being,
destined to become the people's regenerator and instructor."

[124] Speech of May 16, 1794, and of Thermidor 8, year II.

[125] Buchez et Roux, X., 295, 296.  (Session June 22, 1791, of the
Jacobin Club.) - Ibid., 294.  - Marat spoke in the same vein: "I have
made myself a curse for all good people in France." He writes, the
same date: "Writers in behalf of the people will be dragged to
dungeons.  'The friend of the people,' whose last sigh is given for
his country, and whose faithful voice still summons you to freedom, is
to find his grave in a fiery furnace." The last expression shows the
difference in their imaginations.

[126] Hamel, II., 122.  (Meeting of the Jacobin Club, Feb.10, 1792.)
"To obtain death at the hands of tyrants is not enough - one must
deserve death.  If it be true that the earliest defenders of liberty
became its martyrs they should not suffer death without bearing
tyranny along with them into the grave." - Cf., ibid., II., 215.
(Meeting of April 27, 1792.)

[127] Hamel, II., 513.  (Speech in the Convention, Prairial 7, year
II.)

[128] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 422, 445, 447, 457.  (Speech in the
Convention, Thermidor 8, year II.)

[129] Buchez et Roux, XX., 11, 18.  (Meeting of the Jacobin Club,
Oct.29, 1792.) Speech on Lafayette, the Feuillants and Girondists.
XXXI., 360, 363.  (Meeting of the Convention, May 7, 1794.) On
Lafayette, the Girondists, Dantonists and Hébertists.  - XXXIII., 427.
(Speech of Thermidor 8, year II.)

[130] Garat, "Mémoires," 87, 88.

[131] Buchez et Roux, XXI., 107.  (Speech of Pétion on the charges
made against him by Robespierre.) Petion justly objects that
"Brunswick would be the first to cut off Brissot's head, and Brissot
is not fool enough to doubt it."

[132] Garat, 94.  (After the King's death and a little before the 10th
of March, 1793.)

[133] Ibid., 97.  In 1789 Robespierre assured Garat that Necker was
plundering the Treasury, and that people had seen mules loaded with
the gold and silver he was sending off by millions to Geneva.  -
Carnot, "Mémoires," I.  512.  "Robespierre," say Carnot and Prieur,
"paid very little attention to public business, but a good deal to
public officers; he made himself intolerable with his perpetual
mistrust of these, never seeing any but traitors and conspirators."

[134] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 417.  (Speech of Thermidor 8, year II.)

[135] Ibid., XXXII., 361, (Speech May 7, '794,) and 359.  "Immorality
is the basis of despotism, as virtue is the essence of the Republic."

[136] Ibid., 371.

[137] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 195.  (Report of Couthon and decree in
conformity therewith, Prairial 22, year II.) "The revolutionary
tribunal is organised for the punishment of the people's enemies .  .
.  .  The penalty for all offences within its jurisdiction is death.
Those are held to be enemies of the people who shall have misled the
people, or the representatives of the people, into measures opposed to
the interests of liberty; those who shall have sought to create
discouragement by favoring the undertakings of tyrants leagued against
the Republic; those who shall have spread false reports to divide or
disturb the people; those who shall have sought to misdirect opinion
and impede popular instruction, produce depravity and corrupt the
public conscience, diminish the energy and purity of revolutionary and
republican principles, or stay their progress    Those who, charged
with public functions, abuse them to serve the enemies of the
Revolution, vex patriots, oppress the people, etc."

[138] Buchez et Roux, XXXV., 290.  (" Institutions," by Saint-Just.)
"The Revolution is chilled.  Principles have lost their vigor.
Nothing remains but red-caps worn by intrigue." - Report by Courtois,
"Pièces justificatives" No.20.  (Letter of Pays and Rompillon,
president and secretary of the committee of Surveillance of Saint-
Calais, to Robespierre, Nivôse 15, year II.) "The Mountain here is
composed of only a dozen or fifteen men on whom you can rely as on
yourself; the rest are either deceived, seduced, corrupted or enticed
away.  Public opinion is debauched by the gold and intrigues of honest
folks."

[139] Report by Courtois, N.  43.  - Cf.  Hamel, III., 43, 71.  - (The
following important document is on file in the Archives Nationales, F
7, 4446, and consists of two notes written by Robespierre in June and
July, 1793): "Who are our enemies? The vicious and the rich.  .  .  .
How may the civil war be stopped? Punish traitors and conspirators,
especially guilty deputies and administrators .  .  .  .  make
terrible examples .  .  .  .  proscribe perfidious writers and anti-
revolutionaries .  .  .  .  Internal danger comes from the bourgeois;
to overcome the bourgeois, rally the people.  The present insurrection
must be kept up .  .  .  .  The insurrection should gradually continue
to spread out .  .  .  The sans-culottes should be paid and remain in
the towns.  They ought to be armed, worked up, taught."

[140] The committee of Public Safety, and Robespierre especially, knew
of and commanded the drownings of Nantes, as well as the principal
massacres by Carrier, Turreau, etc.  (De Martel, "Etude sur Fouché,"
257-265.) - Ibid., ("Types revolutionnaires," 41-49.) - Buchez et
Roux, XXXIII., 101 (May 26, 1794.) Report by Barère and decree of the
convention ordering that "No English prisoners should be taken."
Robespierre afterwards speaks in the same sense.  Ibid., 458.  After
the capture of Newport, where they took five thousand English
prisoners, the French soldiers were unwilling to execute the
convention's decree, on which Robespierre (speech of Thermidor 8)
said: "I warn you that your decree against the English has constantly
been violated; England, so ill-treated in our speeches, is spared by
our arms."

[141] On the Girondists, Cf.  "The Revolution," II., 216.

[142] Buchez et Roux, XXX., 157.  Sketch of a speech on the Fabre
d'Eglantine factim.  - Ibid., 336, Speech at the Jacobin Club against
Clootz.  - XXXII., abstract of a report on the Chabot affair, 18.-
Ibid., 69, Speech on maintaining Danton's arrest.

[143] Ibid., XXX., 378.  (Dec.10, 1793.) With respect to the women who
crowd the Convention in order to secure the liberty of their husbands:
"Should the repubican women forget their virtues as citizens whenever
they remembering that they are wives?"

[144] Hamel, III., 196.  - Michelet, V., 394, abstract of the judicial
debates on the disposition of the Girondists: "The minutes of this
decree are found in Robespierre's handwriting."

[145] De Martel, "Types revolutionnaires," 44.  The instructions sent
to the Revolutionary Tribunal at Orange are in Robespierre's
handwriting.  - (Archives Nationales, F7 4439.)

[146] Merlin de Thionville.

[147] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 71.  (On Danton.) "Before the day is
over we shall see whether the convention will shatter an idol a long
time rotten.  .  .  .  In what respect is Danton superior to his
fellow-citizens? .  .  .  .  I say that the man who now hesitates is
guilty.  .  .  .  .  The debate, just begun, is a danger to the
country." - Also the speech in full, against Clootz.

[148] Ibid., XXX., 338.  "Alas, suffering patriots, what can we do,
surrounded by enemies fighting in our own ranks! .  .  .  Let us
watch, for the fall of our country is not far off," etc.  - These
cantatas, with the accompaniments of the celestial harp, are terrible
if we consider the circumstances.  For instance, on the 3rd of
September, 1792, in the electoral assembly while the massacres are
going on: "M. Robespierre climbs up on the tribune and declares that
he will calmly face the steel of the enemies of public good, and carry
with him to his grave the satisfaction of having served his country,
the certainty of France having preserved its liberty".  - (Archives
Nationales, C.  II., 58-76.)

[149] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 360, 371.  (Speech of May 7, 1794.)
"Danton1 the most dangerous, if he had not been the most cowardly, of
the enemies of his country .  .  .  .  Danton, the coldest, the most
indifferent, during his country's greatest peril."

[150] Ibid., XXXIV., -- Cf.  the description of him by Fievée, who saw
him in the tribune at the Jacobin Club.

[151] Merlin de Thionville "A vague, painful anxiety, due to his
temperament, was the sole source of his activity."

[152] Barère, " Mémoires." "He wanted to rule France influentially
rather than directly." - Buchez et Roux, XIV., 188.  (Article by
Marat.) During the early sessions of the Legislative Assembly, Marat
saw Robespierre on one occasion, and explained to him his plans for
exciting popular outbreaks, and for his purifying massacres.
"Robespierre listened to me with dismay, turned pale and kept silent
for some moments.  This interview confirmed me in the idea I always
had of him, that he combined the enlightenment of a wise senator with
the uprightness of a genuine good man and the zeal of a true patriot,
but that he equally lacked the views and boldness of a statesman." -
Thibaudeau, "Mémoires," 58.  - He was the only member of the committee
of Public Safety who did not join the department missions.

[153] Someone is "grandisonian" when he is like the novelist
Richardson's hero, Sir Walter Grandison, beneficient, polite and
chivalrous.  (SR).

[154] Buchez et Roux XX., 198.  (Speech of Robespierre in the
Convention, November 5, 1792.)

[155] All these statements by Robespierre are opposed to the truth.  -
("Procés-verbaux des Séances de la Commune de Paris.") Sep.  1, 1792,
Robespierre speaks twice at the evening session.  - The testimony of
two persons, both agreeing, indicate, moreover, that he spoke at the
morning session, the names of the speakers not being given.  "The
question," says Pétion (Buchez et Roux, XXI., 103), "was the decree
opening the barriers." This decree is under discussion at the Commune
at the morning session of September 1: "Robespierre, on this question,
spoke in the most animated manner, wandering off in sombre flights of
imagination; he saw precipices at his feet and plots of liberticides;
he designated the pretended conspirators."- Louvet (ibid., 130),
assigns the same date, (except that he takes the evening for the
morning session), for Robespierre's first denunciation of the
Girondists: "Nobody, then," says Robespierre, "dare name the traitors?
Very well, I denounce them.  I denounce them for the security of the
people.  I denounce the liberticide Brissot, the Girondist faction,
the villainous committee of twenty-one in the National Assembly.  I
denounce them for having sold France to Brunswick and for having
received pay in advance for their baseness." - Sep.  2, ("Procès
verbaux de la Commune," evening session), "MM. Billaud-Varennes and
Robespierre, in developing their civic sentiments, .  .  denounce to
the Conseil-Général the conspirators in favor of the Duke of
Brunswick, whom a powerful party want to put on the throne of France."
- September 3, at 6 o'clock in the morning, (Buchez et Roux, 16, 132,
letter of Louvet), commissioners of the Commune present themselves at
Brissot's house with an order to inspect his papers; one of them says
to Brissot that he has eight similar orders against the Gironde
deputies and that he is to begin with Guadet.  (Letter of Brissot
complaining of this visit, Monitur, Sep.  7, 1792.) This same day,
Sep.  31 Robespierre presides at the Commune.  (Granier de Cassagnac,
"Les Girondins" II., 63.) It is here that a deputation of the
Mauconseil section comes to find him, and he is charged by the
"Conseil" with a commission at the Temple.  - Sept.  4 (Buchez et
Roux, XXI., 106, Speech of Petion), the Commune issues a warrant of
arrest against Roland; Danton comes to the Mayoralty with Robespierre
and has the warrant revoked; Robespierre ends by telling Petion: " I
believe that Brissot belongs to Brunswick." - Ibid., 506.
"Robespierre (before Sept.  2), took the lead in the Conseil"- Ibid.,
107.  " Robespierre," I said, "you are making a good deal of mischief.
Your denunciations, your fears, hatreds and suspicions, excite the
people."

[156] Garat, 86.-Cf.  Hamel, I., 264.  (Speech, June 9, 1791.)

[157] "The Revolution," II., 338, 339.  (Speech.  Aug.  3, 1792.)

[158] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 420.  (Speech, Thermidor 8.)

[159] Ibid., XXXII., 71.  (Speech against Danton.) "What have you done
that you have not done freely?"

[160] Ibid., XXXIII., 199 and 221.  (Speech on the law of Prairial
22.)

[161] Mirabeau said of Robespierre: "Whatever that man has said, he
believes in it.  - Robespierre, Duplay's guest, dined every day with
Duplay, a juryman in the revolutionary tribunal and co-operator for
the guillotine, at eighteen francs a day.  The talk at the table
probably turned on the current abstractions; but there must have been
frequent allusions to the condemnations of the day, and, even when not
mentioned, they were in their minds.  Only Robert Browning, at the
present day, could imagine and revive what was spoken and thought in
those evening conversations before the mother and daughters.

[162] Today, more than 100 years later, where are we? Is it possible
that man can thus lie to himself and hence to others? Robert Wright,
in his book "The Moral Animal", describing "The New Science of
Evolutionary Psychology", writes (page 280): "The proposition here is
that the human brain is, in large part, a machine for winning
arguments, a machine for convincing others that its owner is in the
right - and thus a machine for convincing its owner of the same thing.
The brain is like a good lawyer: given any set of interests to defend,
its sets about convincing the world of their moral and logical worth,
regardless of whether they in fact have any of either.  Like a lawyer,
it is sometimes more admirable for skill than for virtue." (SR).

[163] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 151.  - Cf..  Dauban, "Paris en 1794,"
p.386 (engraving) and 392, Fête de l'Être Suprême à Sceaux," according
to the programme drawn up by the patriot Palloy.  "All citizens are
requested to be at their windows or doors, even those occupying the
rear part of the main buildings."- Ibid., 399.  "Youthful citizens
will strew flowers at each station, fathers will embrace their
children and mothers turn their eyes upward to heaven." - Moniteur,
XXX., 653.  "Plan of the fête in honor of the Supreme Being, drawn up
by David, and decreed by the National Convention."

[164] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 176.  (Narrative by Valate.)

[165] Hamel, III., 541.

[166] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 178, 180.

[167] Ibid., 177 (Narrative by Vilate.) Ibid., 170, Notes by
Robespierre on Bourdon (de l'Oise) 417.  Passages erased by
Robespierre in the manuscript of his speech of Thermidor 8.  - 249.
Analogous passages in his speech as delivered, - all these indications
enable us to trace the depths of his resentment.

[168] Ibid., 183.  Memoirs of Billaud-Varennes, Collot d'Herbois,
Vadier and Barère.  "The next day after Prairial 22, at the morning
session (of the committee of Public Safety) .  .  .  .  I now see,
says Robespierre, that I stand alone, with nobody to support me, and,
getting violently excited, he launched out against the members of the
committee who had conspired against him.  He shouted so loud as to
collect together a number of citizens on the Tuileries terrace."
Finally, "he pushed hypocrisy so far as to shed tears." The nervous
machine, I imagine, broke down.  - Another member of the committee,
Prieur, (Carnot, "Mémoires," II., 525), relates that, in the month of
Floréal, after another equally long and violent session, "Robespierre,
exhausted, became ill."

[169] Carnot, "Mémoires," II.  526.  "As his bureau was in a separate
place, where none of us set foot, he could retire to it without coming
in contact with any of us, as in effect, he did.  He even made a
pretence of passing through the committee rooms, after the session was
over, and he signed some papers; but he really neglected nothing,
except our common discussions.  He held frequent conferences in his
house with the presidents of the revolutionary tribunals, over which
his influence was greater than ever."

[170] Dauban, "Paris en 1794," 563.  - Archives Nationales, AF.II.,
58.  The signature of Robespierre, in his own handwriting, is found
affixed to many of the resolutions of the Committee of Public Safety,
passed Thermidor 5 and 7, and those of St.  Just and Couthon after
this, up to Thermidor 3, 6 and 7.  On the register of the minutes of
the Committee of Public Safety, Robespierre is always recorded as
present at all meetings between Messidor 1 and Thermidor 8, inclusive.

[171] Archives Nationales, F.7, 4438.  Report to the Committee of
Public Safety by Herman, Commissioner of the civil and Police
administrations and of the Courts, Messidor 3, year II.  "The
committee charged with a general surpervision of the prisons, and
obliged to recognize that all the rascals mostly concerned with
liberticide plots are.  .  .  .  still in the prisons, forming a band
apart, and rendering surveillance very troublesome; they are a
constant source of disorder, always getting up attempts to escape,
being a daily assemblage of persons devoting themselves wholly to
imprecations against liberty and its defenders.  .  .  .  It would be
easy to point out in each prison, those who have served, and are to
serve, the diverse factions, the diverse conspiracies.  .  .  .  It
may be necessary, perhaps, to purge the prisons at once and free the
soil of liberty of their filth, the refuse of humanity." The Committee
of Public Safety consequently "charges the commission to ascertain in
the prisons of Paris.  .  .  who have been more specially concerned in
the diverse factions and conspiracies that the National convention has
destroyed." The word "approved" appears at the foot of the resolution
in Robespierre's handwriting, then the signature of Robespierre, and
lower down, those of Billaud and Barère.  A similar resolution
providing for the 7th of Messidor, signed by the same parties and five
others, is dispatched the same day.  (M. de Martel came across and
made use of this conclusive document before I did, most of it being
quoted in "Les Types Revolutionnaires.")

[172] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 434.



CHAPTER II.  THE RULERS OF THE COUNTRY.

Let us follow the operations of the new government from top to bottom,
from those of its ruling bodies and leaders, to its assemblies,
committees, delegates, administrators and underlings of every kind and
degree.  Like living flesh stamped with a red-hot iron, so will the
situation put one their brows the two marks, each with its own
different depth and discoloration.  In vain do they, too, strive to
conceal their scars: we detect under the crowns and titles they assume
the brand of the slave or the mark of the tyrant.

I.   The Convention.

The Convention.  - The "Plain." - The "Mountain." - Degradation of
Souls.  - Parades which the Convention is obligated to make.

At the Tuileries, the omnipotent Convention sits enthroned in the
theater, converted into an Assembly room.  It carries on its
deliberations daily, in grand style.  Its decrees, received with blind
obedience, startle France and upset all Europe.  At a distance, its
majesty is imposing, more august than that of the Republican senate in
Rome.  Near by, the effect is quite otherwise; these undisputed
sovereigns are serfs who live in trances, and justly so, for, nowhere,
even in prison, is there more constraint and less security than on
their benches.  After the 2nd of June, 1793, their inviolable
precincts, the grand official reservoir from which legal authority
flows, becomes a sort of tank, into which the revolutionary net
plunges and successfully brings out its choicest fish, singly or by
the dozen, and sometimes in vast numbers; at first, the sixty-seven
Girondist deputies, who are executed or proscribed; then, the seventy-
three members of the "Right," swept off in one day and lodged in the
prison of La Force; next, the prominent Jacobins:

Osselin, arrested on the 19th of Brumaire, Bazire, Chabot, and
Delaunay, accused by decree on the 24th Brumaire, Fabre d'Eglantine,
arrested on the 24th of Nivôse, Bernard, guillotined on the 3rd of
Pluviôse, Anacharsis Clootz guillotined on the 4th of Germinal,
Hérault de Séchelles, Lacroix, Philippeaux, Camille Desmoulins and
Danton, guillotined with four others on the 10th of Germinal, Simon,
guillotined on the 24th of Germinal, and Osselin, guillotined on the
8th of Messidor.  - Naturally, the others take warning and are
careful.  At the opening of the session they are seen entering the
hall, looking uneasy, full of distrust,"[1] like animals driven into a
pen and suspicious of a trap.

"Each," writes an eye-witness, "acted and spoke with circumspection,
for fear of being charged with some crime: in effect, nothing was
unimportant, the seat one took, a glance of the eye, a gesture, a
murmur, a smile."

Hence, they flock instinctively to the side which is best sheltered,
the left side.

 "The tide flowed towards the summit of the Mountain; the right side
was deserted.  .  .  .  Many took no side at all, and, during the
session, often changed their seats, thinking that they might thus
elude the spy by donning a mixed hue and keeping on good terms with
everybody.  The most prudent never sat down; they kept off the
benches, at the foot of the tribune, and, on matters getting to be
serious, slipped quietly out of the hall."

Most of them took refuge in their committee-rooms; each tries to be
over-looked, to be obscure, to appear insignificant or absent.[2]
During the four months following the 2nd of June, the hall of the
Convention is half or three-quarters empty; the election of a
president does not bring out two hundred and fifty voters;[3] only two
hundred, one hundred, fifty votes, elect the Committees of Public
Safety and General Security; about fifty votes elect the judges of the
Revolutionary Tribunal; less than ten votes elect their
substitutes;[4] not one vote is cast for the adoption of the decree
indicting the deputy, Dulaure;[5] "no member rises for or against it;
there is no vote;" the president, nevertheless, pronounces the act
passed and the Marais lets things take their course." - "Marais
frogs"[6] is the appellation bestowed on them before the 2nd of June,
when, amongst the dregs of the "Center," they "broke" with the
"Mountain;" now, they still number four hundred and fifty, three times
as many as the " Montagnards; "but they purposely keep quiet; their
old name "renders them, so to say, soft; their ears ring with eternal
menaces; their hearts shrivel up with terror;[7] while their tongues,
paralyzed by habitual silence, remain as if glued to the roofs of
their mouths.  In vain do they keep in the back-ground, consent to
everything, ask nothing for themselves but personal safety, and
surrender all else, their votes, their wills and their consciences;
they feel that their life hangs by a thread.  The greatest mute among
them all, Siéyès, denounced in the Jacobin Club, barely escapes, and
through the protection of his shoemaker, who rises and exclaims :
"That Siéyès ! I know him.  He don't meddle with politics.  He does
nothing but read his book.  I make his shoes and will answer for
him."[8]

Of course, previous to the 9th of Thermidor, none of them open their
mouths; it is only the "Montagnards" who make speeches, and on the
countersign being given.  If Legendre, the admirer, disciple and
confidential friend of Danton, dares at one time interfere in relation
to the decree which sends his friend to the scaffold, asking that he
may first be heard, it is only to retract immediately; that very
evening, at the Jacobin club, for greater security, "he wallows in the
mud;"[9] he declares "that he submits to the judgment of the
revolutionary Tribunal," and swears to denounce "whoever shall oppose
any obstacle to the execution of the decree."[10] Has not Robespierre
taught him a lesson, and in his most pedantic manner? What is more
beautiful, says the great moralist, more sublime, than an Assembly
which purges itself?[11] - Thus, not only is the net which has already
dragged out so many palpitating victims still intact, but it is
enlarged and set again, only, the fish are now caught on the "Left" as
well as on the "Right," and preferably on the topmost benches of the
"Mountain."[12] And better still, through the law of Prairial 22, its
meshes are reduced in size and its width increased; with such
admirable contraption, the fishpond could not fail to be exhausted.  A
little before the 9th of Thermidor, David, who was one of
Robespierre's devoted adherents, himself exclaimed: "Will twenty of us
be left on the Mountain?" About the same time, Legendic, Thuriot,
Léonard Bourdon, Tallien, Bourdon de l'Oise, and others, each has a
spy all day long at his heels.  There are thirty deputies to be
proscribed and their names are whispered about; whereupon, sixty stay
out all night, convinced that they will be seized the next morning
before they can get up.[13]

Subject to such a system, prolonged for so many months, people sink
down and become discouraged.  "Everybody made themselves small so as
to pass beneath the popular yoke.[14] Everybody became one of the low
class.  .  .  .  Clothes, manners, refinement, cleanliness, the
conveniences of life, civility and politeness were all renounced." -
People wear their clothes indecently and curse and swear; they try to
resemble the sans-culottes Montagnards "who are profane and dress
themselves like so many dock-loafers;"[15] at Armonville, the carder,
who presides (at a meeting) wears a woolen cap, and similarly at
Cusset, a gauze-workman, who is always drunk.  Only Robespierre dares
appear in neat attire; among the others, who do not have his
influence, among the demi-suspects with a pot-belly, such a residue of
the ancient régime might become dangerous; they do well not to attract
the attention of the foul-mouthed spy who cannot spell;[16] especially
is it important at a meeting to be one of the crowd and remain
unnoticed by the paid claqueurs, drunken swaggerers and "fat
petticoats" of the tribunes.  It is even essential to shout in harmony
with them and join in their bar-room dances.  The deputations of the
popular clubs come for fourteen months to the bar of the house and
recite their common-place or bombastic tirades, and the Convention is
forced to applaud them.  For nine months,[17] street ballad-singers
and coffee-house ranters attend in full session and sing the rhymes of
the day, while the Convention is obliged to join in the chorus.  For
six weeks,[18] the profaners of churches come to the hall and display
their dance-house buffooneries, and the Convention has not only to put
up with these, but also to take part in them.  - Never, even in
imperial Rome, under Nero and Heliogabalus, did a senate descend so
low.

II.

How the parades are carried out.  - Its slavery and servility - Its
participation in crime.

Observe one of their parades, that of Brumaire 20th, 22nd or 30th,
which masquerade often occurs several times a week and is always the
same, with scarcely any variation.  - Male and female wretches march
in procession to the doors of the deputies' hall, still "drunk with
the wine imbibed from chalices, after eating mackerel broiled in
patens," besides refreshing themselves on the way.  "Mounted astride
of asses which they have rigged out in chasuble and which they guide
with a stole," they halt at each low smoking-den, holding a drinking
cup in their hand; the bartender, with a mug in his hand, fills it,
and, at each station, they toss off their bumpers, one after the
other, in imitation of the Mass, and which they repeat in the street
in their own fashion.  - On finishing this, they don copes, chasubles
and dalmatica, and, in two long lines, file before the benches of the
Convention.  Some of them bear on hand-barrows or in baskets,
candelabra, chalices, gold and silver salvers, monstrances, and
reliquaries; others hold aloft banners, crosses and other
ecclesiastical spoils.  In the mean time "bands play the air of the
carmagnole and 'Malbrook.' .  .  .  On the entry of the dais, they
strike up 'Ah! le bel oiseau;'"[19] all at once the masqueraders throw
off their disguise, and, mitres, stoles, chasubles flung in the air,
"disclose to view the defenders of the country in the national
uniform." Peals of laughter, shouts and enthusiasm, while the
instrumental din becomes louder! The procession, now in full blast,
demands the carmagnole, and the Convention consents; even some of the
deputies descend from their benches and cut the pigeon-wing with the
merry prostitutes.  - To wind up, the Convention decrees that it will
attend that evening the fête of Reason and, in fact, they go in a
body.  Behind an actress in short petticoats wearing a red cap,
representing Liberty or Reason, march the deputies, likewise in red
caps, shouting and singing until they reach the new temple, which is
built of planks and pasteboard in the choir of Notre Dame.  They take
their seats in the front rows, while the Goddess, an old frequenter of
the suppers of the Duc de Soubise, along with "all the pretty dames of
the Opera," display before them their operatic graces.[20] They sing
the "Hymn to Liberty," and, since the Convention has that morning
decreed that it must sing, I suppose that it also joined in.[21] After
this there follows dancing; but, unfortunately, the authorities are
wanting for stating whether the Convention danced or not.  In any
event, it is present at the dance, and thus consecrates an unique
orgy, not Rubens' "Kermesse" in the open air, racy and healthy, but a
nocturnal boulevard-jollification, a "Mardi-gras" composed of lean and
haggard scapegraces.  - In the great nave of the Cathedral, "the
dancers, almost naked, with bare necks and breasts, and stockings down
at the heel," writhe and stamp, "howling the carmagnole." In the side
chapels, which are "shut off by high tapestries, prostitutes with
shrill voices" pursue their avocation.[22] - To descend to this low
level so barefacedly, to fraternise with barrier sots, and wenches, to
endure their embraces and hiccoughs, is bad enough, even for docile
deputies.  More than one half of them loathed it beforehand and
remained at home; after this they do not feel disposed to attend the
Convention.[23]  - But the " Mountain sends for them, and an officer
brings them back;" it is necessary that they should co-operate through
their presence and felicitations in the profanations and apostasies
which follow;[24] it is necessary that they should approve of and
decree that which they hold in horror, not alone folly and nonsense,
but crime, the murder of innocent people, and that of their friends.
- All this is done.   "Unanimously, and with the loudest applause,"
the Left, united with the Right, sends Danton to the scaffold, its
natural chieftain, the great promoter and leader of the
Revolution.[25]  "Unanimously, and with the loudest applause," the
Right, united with the Left, votes the worse decrees of the
Revolutionary government.[26] "Unanimously," with approving and
enthusiastic cheers, manifesting the warmest sympathy for Collot
d'Herbois, Couthon, and Robespierre,[27] the Convention, through
multiplied and spontaneous re-elections, maintains the homicidal
government which the Plain detests, because it is homicidal, and which
the Mountain detests, because it is decimated by it.  Plain and
Mountain, by virtue of terror, majority after majority, end in
consenting to and bringing about their own suicide: on the 22nd of
Prairial, the entire Convention has stretched out its neck;[28] on the
8th of Thermidor, for a quarter of an hour after Robespierre's
speech,[29] it has again stretched this out, and would probably have
succumbed, had not five or six of them, whom Robespierre designated or
named, Bourdon de l'Oise, Vadier, Cambon, Billaud and Panis,
stimulated by the animal instinct of self-preservation, raised their
arms to ward off the knife.  Nothing but imminent, personal, mortal
danger could, in these prostrated beings, supplant long-continued fear
with still greater fear.  Later on, Siéyès, on being asked how he
acted in these times, replied, "I lived."  In effect, he and others
are reduced to that; they succeeded in doing this, at all costs, and
at what a price![30]  His secret notes, his most private sketches
confirm this[31].  .  .

 "On the Committee of March 20, "Paillasse, half drunk, gives a
dissertation on the way to carry on the war, and interrogates and
censures the Minister.  The poor Minister evades his questions with
café gossip and a review of campaigns.  These are the men placed at
the head of the government to save the Republic!" - " H...., in his
distraction, had the air of a sly fox inwardly smiling at his own
knavish thoughts.  Ruit irrevocabile vulgus .  .  .  Jusque Datum
sceleri." - "Are you keeping silent?" - "Of what use is my glass of
wine in this torrent of ardent spirits? " -

 All this is very well, but he did not merely keep silent and abstain.
He voted, legislated and decreed, along with the unanimous Convention;
he was a collaborator, not only passively, through his presence, but
also through his active participation in the acts of the government
which he elected and enthroned, re-elected twelve times, cheered every
week, and flattered daily, authorizing and keeping on to the end its
work of spoliation and massacre.

"Everybody is guilty here," said Carrier in the Convention, "even to
the president's bell."

In vain do they constantly repeat to themselves that they were forced
to obey under penalty of death: the conscience of the purest among
them, if he has any, replies:

"You too, in spite of yourself, I admit; less than others, if you
please, but  you were a terrorist, that is to say, a brigand and an
assassin."[32]

III.  The Committee of Public Safety.

The Men who do the work.  - Carnot, Prieur de-la-Côte d'Or, Jean Bon
Saint André, Robert Lindet.

On a man becoming a slave, said old Homer, the Gods take away the half
of his soul; the same is true of a man who becomes a tyrant.  - In the
Pavilion de Flore, alongside of and above the enslaved Convention, sit
the twelve kings it has enthroned, twice a day,[33] ruling over it as
well as over France.[34]  Of course, some guarantee is required from
those who fill this place; there is not one of them who is not a
revolutionary of long standing, an impenitent regicide, a fanatic in
essence and a despot through principle; but the fumes of omnipotence
have not intoxicated them all to the same degree.  - Three or four of
them, Robert Lindet, Jean Bon St.  André, Prieur de la Côte-d'Or and
Carnot, confine themselves to useful and secondary duties; this
suffices to keep them partially safe.  As specialists, charged with an
important service, their first object is to do this well, and hence
they subordinate the rest to this, even theoretical exigencies and the
outcries of the clubs.

Lindet's prime object is to feed the departments that are without
wheat, and the towns that are soon to be short of bread.

Prieur's business is to see that biscuits, brandy, clothes, shoes,
gunpowder and arms are manufactured.[35]

Jean Bon, that vessels are equipped and crews drilled.

Carnot, to draw up campaign plans and direct the march of armies: the
dispatch of so many bags of grain during the coming fortnight to this
or that town, or warehouse in this or that district; the making up of
so many weekly rations, to be deported during the month to certain
places on the frontier; the transformation of so many fishermen into
artillerymen or marines, and to set afloat so many vessels in three
months; to expedite certain Corps of Cavalry, infantry and artillery,
so as to arrive by such and such roads at this or that pass -

These are precise combinations which purge the brain of dogmatic
phrases, which force revolutionary jargon into the background and keep
a man sensible and practical; and all the more because three of them,
Jean Bon, former captain of a merchantman, Prieur and Carnot,
engineering officers, are professional men and go to the front to put
their shoulders to the wheel on the spot.  Jean Bon, always visiting
the coasts, goes on board a vessel of the fleet leaving Brest to save
the great American convoy; Carnot, at Watignies, orders Jourdan to
make a decisive move, and, shouldering his musket, marches along with
the attacking column.[36]  Naturally, they have no leisure for
speechmaking in the Jacobin club, or for intrigues in the Convention:
Carnot lives in his own office and in the committee-room; he does not
allow himself time enough to eat with his wife, dines on a crust of
bread and a glass of lemonade, and works sixteen and eighteen hours a
day;[37] Lindet, more overtasked than any body else, because hunger
will not wait, reads every report himself, and passes days and nights
at it;"[38] Jean Bon, in wooden shoes and woolen vest, with a bit of
coarse bread and a glass of bad beer,[39] writes and dictates until
his strength fails him, and he has to lie down and sleep on a mattress
on the floor.  - Naturally, again, when interfered with, and the tools
in their hands are broken, they are dissatisfied; they know well the
worth of a good instrument, and for the service, as they comprehend
it, good tools are essential, competent, faithful employees, regular
in attendance at their offices, and not at the club.  When they have a
subordinate of this kind they defend him, often at the risk of their
lives, even to incurring the enmity of Robespierre.  Cambon,[40] who,
on his financial committee, is also a sort of sovereign, retains at
the Treasury five or six hundred employees unable to procure their
certificate of civism, and whom the Jacobins incessantly denounce so
as to get their places.  Carnot saves and employs eminent engineers,
D'Arcon, de Montalembert, d'Obenheim, all of them nobles, and one of
them an anti-Jacobin, without counting a number of accused officers
whom he justifies, replaces, or maintains.[41] - Through these
courageous and humane acts, they solace themselves for their scruples,
at least partially and for the time being; moreover, they are
statesmen only because the occasion and superior force makes it
imperative, more led by others than leading, terrorists through
accident and necessity, rather than through system and instinct.  If,
in concert with ten others, Prieur and Carnot order wholesale robbery
and murder, if they sign orders by twenties and hundreds, amounting to
assassinations, it is owing to their forming part of a body.  When the
whole committee deliberates, they are bound, in important decrees, to
submit to the preponderating opinion of the majority, after voting in
the negative.  In relation to secondary decrees, in which there has
been no preliminary discussion in common, the only responsible member
is the one whose signature stands first; the following signatures
affixed, without reading the document, are simply a "formality which
the law requires," merely a visa, necessarily mechanical; with "four
or five hundred business matters to attend to daily," it is impossible
to do otherwise.  To read all and vote in every case, would be "a
physical impossibility."[42] - Finally, as things are, "is not the
general will, at least the apparent general will, that alone on which
the government can decide, itself ultra-revolutionary?"[43]  In other
words, should not the five or six rascals in a State who vociferate,
be listened to, rather than a hundred honest folks who keep their
mouths shut? With this sophism, gross as it is, but of pure Jacobin
manufacture, Carnot ends by hoodwinking his honor and his conscience;
otherwise intact, and far more so than his colleagues, he likewise
undergoes moral and mental mutilation; constrained by the duties of
his post and the illusions of his creed, he succeeded in an inward
decapitation of the two noblest of human faculties, common-sense, the
most useful, and the moral sense, the most exalted of all.



IV.  The Statesmen.

Billaud-Varennes, Collot d'Herbois, Robespierre, Couthon and Saint-
Just.  - Conditions of this rule.  - Dangers to which they are
subject.  - Their dissensions.  - Pressure of Fear and Theory.

If such are the ravages which are made in an upright, firm and healthy
personality, what must be the havoc in corrupt or weak natures, in
which bad instincts already predominate! - And note that they are
without the protection provided by a pursuit of some specific and
useful objective.  They are "government men," also "revolutionaries"
or "the people in total control;"[44] they are in actual fact men with
an overall concept of things, also direct these.  The creation,
organization and application of Terror belongs wholly to them; they
are the constructors, regulators and engineers of the machine,[45] the
recognized heads of the party, of the sect and of the government,
especially Billaud and Robespierre, who never serve on missions,[46]
nor relax their hold for a moment on the central motor.  The former,
an active politician, with Collot for his second, is charged with
urging on the constituted authorities, the districts, the
municipalities, the national agents, the revolutionary committees, and
the representatives on mission in the interior.[47] The latter, a
theologian, moralist, titular doctor and preacher, is charged with
ruling the Convention and indoctrinating the Jacobins with sound
principles; behind him stands Couthon, his lieutenant, with Saint-
Just, his disciple and executor of works of great importance; in their
midst, Barère, the Committee's mouthpiece, is merely a tool, but
indispensable, conveniently at hand and always ready to start whatever
drum-beating is required on any given theme in honor of the party
which stuffs his brain.  Below these comes the Committee of General
Security, Vadier, Amar, Vouland, Guffroy, Panis, David, Jagot and the
rest, those who undertook, reported on, and acted in behalf of
universal proscription.  All these bear the imprint of their service;
they could be recognized by "their pallid hue, hollow and bloodshot
eyes,"[48] habits of omnipotence stamped "on their brows, and on their
deportment, something indescribably haughty and disdainful.  The
Committee of General Security reminded one of the former lieutenants
of police, and the Committee of Public Safety, of the former ministers
of state." In the Convention, "it is considered an honor to talk with
them, and a privilege to shake hands with them; one seems to read
one's duty on their brows." On the days on which their orders are to
be converted into laws "the members of the Committee and the reporter
of the bill, keep people waiting, the same as the heads and
representatives of the former sovereign power; on their way to the
Assembly hall, they are preceded by a group of courtiers who seem to
announce the masters of the world."[49] - In fact, they reign - but
observe on what conditions.

"Make no complaints," said Barère,[50] to the composer of an opera,
the performance of which had just been suspended: "as times go, you
must not attract public attention.  Do we not all stand at the foot of
the guillotine, all, beginning with myself?" Again, twenty years
later, in a private conversation, on being interrogated as to the
veritable object, the secret motive of the Committee of Public Safety,
he replied:

"As we were animated by but one sentiment,[51] my dear sir, that of
self-preservation, we had but one desire, that of maintaining an
existence which each of us believed to be menaced.  You had your
neighbor guillotined to prevent your neighbor from guillotining
you."[52]

The same apprehension exists in stouter souls, although there may have
been, along with fear, motives of a less debased order.

 "How many times," says Carnot,[53] "we undertook some work that
required time, with the conviction that we should not be allowed to
complete it!" - " It was uncertain[54] whether, the next time the
clock struck the hour, we should not be standing before the
revolutionary Tribunal on our way to the scaffold without, perhaps,
having had time to bid adieu to our families.  .  .  .  We pursued our
daily task so as not to let the machine stand still, as if a long life
were before us, when it was probable that we should not see the next
day's sun."

It is impossible to count on one's life, or that of another, for
twenty-four hours; should the iron hand which holds one by the throat
tighten its grasp, all will be over that evening.

 "There were certain days so difficult that one could see no way to
control circumstances; those who were directly menaced resigned
themselves wholly to chance."[55] - " The decisions for which we are
so much blamed," says another,[56] "were not generally thought of two
days, or one day, beforehand; they sprung out of the crisis of the
moment.  We did not desire to kill for the sake of killing .  .  .
but to conquer at all hazards, remain masters, and ensure the sway of
our principles." - That is true, - they are subjects as well as
despots.  At the Committee table, during their nocturnal sessions,
their sovereign presides, a formidable figure, the revolutionary Idea
which confers on them the right to slay, on condition of exercising it
against everybody, and therefore on themselves.  Towards two o'clock,
or three o'clock in the morning, exhausted, out of words and ideas,
not knowing where to slay, on the right or on the left, they anxiously
turn to this figure and try to read its will in its fixed eyes.

 "Who shall fall to-morrow? " -

Ever the same reply steadily expressed on the features of the
impassable phantom: "the counter-revolutionaries," under which name is
comprised all who by act, speech, thought or inmost sentiment, either
through irritation or carelessness, through humanity or moderation,
through egoism or nonchalance, through passive, neutral or indifferent
feeling, serve well or ill the Revolution.[57] - All that remains is
to add names to this horribly comprehensive decree.  Shall Billaud do
it? Shall Robespierre do it? Will Billaud put down Robespierre's name,
or Robespierre put down Billaud's, or each the name of the other, with
those he chooses to select from among the two Committees? Osselin,
Chabot, Bazire, Julien de Toulouse, Lacroix, Danton, were on them, and
when they left, their heads fell.[58]   Hérault-Séchelles, again, was
on them, maintained in office with honor through the recent
approbation of the Convention,[59] one of the titular twelve, and on
duty when an order issued by the other eleven suddenly handed him over
to the revolutionary Tribunal for execution.  - Whose turn is it now
among the eleven? Seized unawares, the docile Convention unanimously
applauding, after three days of a judicial farce, the cart will bear
him to the Place de la Révolution; Samson will tie him fast, shouters
at thirty sous a day will clap their hands, and, on the following
morning, the popular politicians will congratulate each other on
seeing the name of a great traitor on the bulletin of the
guillotined.[60]  To this end, to enable this or that king of the day
to pass from the national Almanac to the mortuary list, merely
required an understanding among his colleagues, and, perhaps, this is
already arrived at.  Among whom and against whom? - It is certain
that, as this idea occurs to the eleven, seated around the table, they
eye each other with a shudder they calculate the chances and turn
things over in their minds; words have been uttered that are not
forgotten.  Carnot often made this charge against Saint-Just: "You and
Robespierre are after a dictatorship."[61] Robespierre replied to
Carnot : "I am ready for you on the first defeat."[62] On another
occasion, Robespierre, in a rage, exclaimed: "The Committee is
conspiring against me!" and, turning to Billaud, "I know you, now!"
Billaud retorted, "I know you too, you are a counter-
revolutionary!"[63] There are conspirators and counter-
revolutionaries, then, on the committee itself; what can be done to
avoid this appellation, which is a sentence of death ? - Silently, the
fatal phantom enthroned in their midst, the Erinyes[64] through which
they rule, renders his oracle and all take it to heart:

"All who are unwilling to become executioners are conspirators and
counter-revolutionaries."

V.

Official Jacobin organs.-  Reports by Saint-Just are Barère.  -
Quality of reports and reporters.

Thus do they march along during twelve months, goaded on by the two
sharp thongs of theory and fear, traversing the red pool which they
have created, and which is daily becoming deeper and deeper, all
together and united, neither of them daring to separate from the
group, and each spattered with the blood thrown in his face by the
others' feet.  It is not long before their eyesight fails them; they
no longer see their way, while the degradation of their language
betrays the stupor of their intellect.  - When a government brings to
the tribune and moves the enactment of important laws, it confronts
the nation, faces Europe, and takes a historical position.  If it
cares for its own honor it will select reporters of bills that are not
unworthy, and instruct them to support these with available arguments,
as closely reasoned out as possible; the bill, discussed and adopted
in full council, will show the measure of its capacity, the
information it possesses and its common-sense.

To estimate all this, read the bills put forth in the name of the
Committee; weigh the preambles, remark the tone, listen to the two
reporters usually chosen, Saint-Just, who draws up the acts of
proscription, special or general, and Barère, who draws up all acts
indifferently, but particularly military announcements and decrees
against the foreigner; never did public personages, addressing France
and posterity, use such irrational arguments and state falsehoods with
greater impudence.[65]

The former, stiff in his starched cravat, posing "like the Holy
Ghost," more didactic and more absolute than Robespierre himself,
comes and proclaims to Frenchmen from the tribune, equality, probity,
frugality, Spartan habits, and a rural cot with all the voluptuousness
of virtue;[66] this suits admirably the chevalier Saint-Just, a former
applicant for a place in the Count d'Artois' body-guard, a domestic
thief, a purloiner of silver plate which he takes to Paris, sells and
spends on prostitutes, imprisoned for six months on complaint of his
own mother,[67] and author of a lewd poem which he succeeds in
rendering filthy by trying to render it fanciful.  - Now, indeed, he
is grave; he no longer leers; he kills - but with what arguments, and
what a style![68] The young Laubardemont as well as the paid informers
and prosecutors of imperial Rome, have less disgraced the human
intellect, for these creatures of a Tiberius or a Richelieu still used
plausible arguments in their reasoning, and with more or less
adroitness.  With Saint-Just, there is no connection of ideas; there
is no sequence or march in his rhapsody; like an instrument strained
to the utmost, his mind plays only false notes in violent fits and
starts; logical continuity, the art then so common of regularly
developing a theme, has disappeared; he stumbles over the ground,
piling up telling aphorisms and dogmatic axioms.  In dealing with
facts there is nothing in his speech but a perversion of the truth;
impostures abound in it of pure invention, palpable, as brazen as
those of a charlatan in his booth;[69] he does not even deign to
disguise them with a shadow of probability; as to the Girondists, and
as to Danton, Fabre d'Eglantine and his other adversaries, whoever
they may be, old or new, any rope to hang them with suffices for him;
any rough, knotted, badly-twisted cord he can lay his hands on, no
matter what, provided it strangles, is good enough; there is no need
of a finer one for confirmed conspirators; with the gossip of the club
and an Inquisition catechism, he can frame his bill of indictment.  -
Accordingly, his intellect grasps nothing and yields him nothing; he
is a sententious and overexcited declaimer, an artificial spirit
always on the stretch, full of affectations,[70] his talent reducing
itself down to the rare flashes of a somber imagination, a pupil of
Robespierre, as Robespierre himself is a pupil of Rousseau, the
exaggerated scholar of a plodding scholar, always rabidly ultra,
furious through calculation, deliberately violating both language and
ideas,[71] confining himself to theatrical and funereal paradoxes, a
sort of "grand vizier"[72] with the airs of an exalted moralist and
the bearing of the sentimental shepherd.[73]  Were one of a mocking
humor one might shrug one's shoulders; but, in the present state of
the Convention, there is no room for anything but fear.  Launched in
imperious tones, his phrases fall upon their ears in monotonous
strokes, on bowed heads, and, after five or six blows from this leaden
hammer, the stoutest are stretched out stupefied on the ground;
discussion is out of the question; when Saint-Just, in the name of the
Convention, affirms anything, it must be believed; his dissertation is
a peremptory injunction and not an effort of reason; it commands
obedience; it is not open to examination; it is not a report which he
draws from his coat pocket, but a bludgeon.

The other reporter, Barère, is of quite another stamp, a "patent-
right" haranguer, an amusing Gascon, alert, "free and easy," fond of a
joke, even on the Committee of Public Safety,[74] unconcerned in the
midst of assassinations, and, to the very last, speaking of the reign
of Terror as "the simplest and most innocent thing in the world."[75]
No man was ever less trammeled by a conscience; in truth, he has
several, that of two days ago, that of the previous day, that of the
present day, that of the morrow, of the following day, and still
others, as many as you like, all equally pliant and supple, at the
service of the strongest against the weakest, ready to swing round at
once on the wind changing, but all joined together and working to one
common end through physical instinct, the only one that lasts in the
immoral, adroit and volatile being who circulates nimbly about, with
no other aim than self-preservation, and to amuse himself.[76]  - In
his dressing-gown, early in the morning, he receives a crowd of
solicitors, and, with the ways of a "dandified minister," graciously
accepts the petitions handed to him; first, those of ladies,
"distributing gallantries among the prettiest;" he makes promises, and
smiles, and then, returning to his cabinet, throws the papers in the
fire: "There," he says, my correspondence is done." - He sups twice
every decade in his fine house at Clichy, along with three more than
accommodating pretty women; he is gay, awarding flatteries and
attentions quite becoming to an amiable protector: he enters into
their professional rivalries, their spites against the reigning
beauty, their jealousy of another who wears a blonde wig and pretends
"to set the fashion." He sends immediately for the National Agent and
gravely informs him that this head-dress, borrowed from the
guillotined, is a rallying point for anti-revolutionaries, whereupon,
the next day, wigs are denounced at the Commune-council, and
suppressed; "Barère roared with laughter on alluding to this piece of
fun." The humor of an undertaker and the dexterity of a commercial
drummer: he plays with Terror.  - In like manner he plays with his
reports, and at this latter exercise, he improvises; he is never
embarrassed; it is simply necessary to turn the faucet and the water
runs.  " Had he any subject to treat, he would fasten himself on
Robespierre, Hérault, Saint-Just, or somebody else, and draw them out;
he would then rush off to the tribune and spin out their ideas; "they
were all astonished at hearing their thoughts expressed as fully as if
reflected in a mirror." No individual on the Committee, or in the
Convention, equaled him in promptness and fluency, for the reason that
he was not obliged to think before he spoke: with him, the faculty of
speaking, like an independent organ, acted by itself, the empty brain
or indifferent heart contributing nothing to his loquacity.
Naturally, whatever issues from his mouth comes forth in ready-made
bombast, the current jargon of the Jacobin club, sonorous, nauseous
commonplace, schoolboy metaphors and similes derived from the
shambles.[77]  Not an idea is found in all this rhetoric, nothing
acquired, no real mental application.  When Bonaparte, who employed
everybody, even Fouché, were disposed to employ Barère, they could
make nothing out of him for lack of substance, except as a low
newsmonger, common spy, or agent engaged to stir up surviving
Jacobins; later on, a listener at keyholes, and a paid weekly
collector of public rumors, he was not even fit for this vile service,
for his wages were soon stopped Napoleon, who, having no time to
waste, cut short his driveling verbiage.  - It is this verbiage which,
authorized by the Committee of Public Safety, now forms the eloquence
of France; it is this manufacturer of phrases by the dozen, this
future informer and prison-spy under the empire, this frolicking
inventor of the blonde-wig conspiracy, that the government sends into
the tribune to announce victories, trumpet forth military heroism and
proclaim war unto death.  On the 7th of Prairial,[78] Barère, in the
name of the committee, proposes a return to savage law : "No English
or Hanoverian prisoner shall henceforth be made;" the decree is
endorsed by Carnot and passes the Convention unanimously.  Had it been
executed, as reprisals, and according to the proportion of prisoners,
there would have been for one Englishman shot, three Frenchmen hung:
honor and humanity would have disappeared from the camps; the
hostilities between Christians would have become as deadly as among
savages.  Happily, French soldiers felt the nobleness of their
profession; on the order being given to shoot the prisoners, a decent
sergeant replied:

 "We will not shoot - send them to the Convention.  If the
representatives delight in killing prisoners - let them do it
themselves, and eat them, too, savages as they are!"

The sergeant, an ordinary man, is not on a level with the Committee,
or with Barère; and yet Barère did his best in a bill of indictment of
twenty-seven pages, full of grand flourishes, every possible
ritornello, glaring falsehood and silly inflation, explaining how "the
Britannic leopard" paid assassins to murder the representatives; how
the London cabinet had armed little Cécile Renault, "the new Corday,"
against Robespierre; how the Englishman, naturally barbarous, "is
unable to deny his origins; how he descends from the Carthaginians and
Phenicians, and formerly dealt in the skins of wild beasts and slaves;
how his trading occupation is not changed; how Cesar, formerly, on
landing in the country, found nothing but a ferocious tribe battling
with wolves in the forest and threatening to burn every vessel which
would try to land there; and how he still remains like that." A
lecture from a fairground surgeon who, using bombastic words,
recommends extensive amputations, a fairground-prospectus so crude
that it does not even deceive a poor sergeant, - such is the
exposition of motives by a government for the purpose of enforcing a
decree that might have been drawn up by redskins; to horrible acts he
adds debased language, and employs the inept to justify their
atrocities.

VI.  Commissars of the Revolution.

Representatives on Mission.  - Their absolute power.  - Their perils
and their fear.  - Fit for their work.  - Effect of this situation.

A hundred or so representatives of the Committee of Public Safety, are
sent to the provinces, "with unlimited power," to establish, enforce
or exacerbate the revolutionary government, and their proclamations at
once explain the nature of this government.[79] - " Brave and vigorous
sans-culottes !" writes a deputy on leaving a mission and announcing
his successor,[80] "You seem to have desired a good b.  .  .  of a
representative, who has never swerved from his principles, that is to
say, a regular Montagnard.  I have fulfilled your wishes, and you will
have the same thing in citizen Ingrand.  Remember, brave sans-
culottes, that, with the patriot Ingrand, you can do everything, get
anything, cancel whatever you please, imprison, bring to trial, deport
and guillotine every-body and regenerate society.  Don't try to play
with him; everybody is afraid of him, he overcomes all resistance and
restores at once the most complete order! " - The representative
arrives at the center of the department by post, and presents his
credentials.  All the authorities at once bow to the ground.  In the
evening, in his saber and plume, he harangues the popular club,
blowing into a flame the smoldering embers of Jacobinism.  Then,
according to his personal acquaintances, if he has any in the place,
or according to the votes of the Committee of General Security, if he
is a new-comer, he selects five or six of the "warmest sans-culottes"
there, and, forming them into a Revolutionary Committee, installs them
permanently at his side, sometimes in the same building, in a room
next to his own, where, on lists or with verbal communications
furnished to him, he works with a will and without stopping.[81]

First comes a purification of all the local authorities.  They must
always remember that "there can be no exaggeration in behalf of the
people; he who is not imbued with this principle, who has not put it
in practice, cannot remain on an advanced post;"[82] consequently, at
the popular club, in the department, in the district, in the
municipality, all doubtful men are excluded, discharged, or
incarcerated; if a few weak ones are retained provisionally, or by
favor, they are berated and taught their duty very summarily:

"They will strive, by a more energetic and assiduous patriotism, to
atone for the evil committed by them in not doing all the good they
could do."

Sometimes, through a sudden change of scene, the entire administrative
staff is kicked out so as to give place to a no less complete staff,
which the same kick brings up out of the ground.  Considering that
"everything stagnates in Vaucluse, and that a frightful moderation
paralyses the most revolutionary measures," Maignet, in one order[83]
appoints the administrators and secretary of the department, the
national agent, the administrators and council-general of the
district, the administrators, council-general and national agent of
Avignon, the president, public prosecutor and recorder of the criminal
court, members of the Tribunal de Commerce, the collector of the
district, the post-master and the head of the squadron of gendarmerie.
And the new functionaries will certainly go to work at once, each in
his office.  The summary process, which has brusquely swept away the
first set of puppets, is going to brusquely install the second one.
"Each citizen appointed to any of the above mentioned offices, shall
betake himself immediately to his post, under penalty of being
declared suspect," on the simple notification of his appointment.
Universal and passive obedience of governors, as well as of the
governed! There are no more elected and independent functionaries; all
the authorities, confirmed or created by the representative, are in
his hands; there is not one among them who does not subsist or survive
solely through his favor; there is not one of them who acts otherwise
than according to his approval or by his order.  Directly, or through
them, he makes requisitions, sequestrates or confiscates as he sees
fit, taxes, imprisons, transports or decapitates as he see fit, and,
in his circumscription, he is the pasha.

But he is a pasha with a chain around his neck, and at short tether.
- From and after December, 1793, he is directed "to conform to the
orders of the Committee of Public Safety and report to it every ten
days."[84] The circumscription in which he commands is rigorously
"limited;" "he is reputed to be without power in the other
departments,"[85] while he is not allowed to grow old on his post.
"In every magistrature the grandeur and extent of power is compensated
by the shortness of its duration.  Over-prolonged missions would soon
be considered as birthrights."[86] Therefore, at the end of two or
three months, often at the end of a month, the incumbent is recalled
to Paris or dispatched elsewhere, at short notice, on the day named,
in a prompt, absolute and sometimes threatening tone, not as a
colleague one humors, but as a subordinate who is suddenly and
arbitrarily revoked or displaced because he is deemed inadequate, or
"used up." For greater security, oftentimes a member of the Committee,
Couthon, Collot, Saint-Just, or some near relation of a member of the
Committee, a Lebas or young Robespierre, goes personally to the spot
to give the needed impulsion; sometimes, agents simply of the
Committee, taken from outside the Convention, and without any personal
standing, quite young men, Rousselin, Julien de la Drôme, replace or
watch the representative with powers equal to his.  - At the same
time, from the top and from the center, he is pushed on and directed:
his local counselors are chosen for him, and the directors of his
conscience;[87] they rate him soundly on the choice of his agents or
of his lodgings;[88] they force dismissals on him, appointments,
arrests, executions; they spur him on in the path of terror and
suffering.  - Around him are paid emissaries,[89] while others watch
him gratis and constantly write to the Committees of Public Safety and
General Security, often to denounce him, always to report on his
conduct, to judge his measures and to provoke the measures which he
does not take.[90]

Whatever he may have done or may do, he cannot turn his eyes toward
Paris without seeing danger ahead, a mortal danger which, on the
Committee, in the Convention, at the Jacobin Club, increases or will
increase against him, like a tempest.  - Briez, who, in Valenciennes
under siege, showed courage, and whom the Convention had just
applauded and added to the Committee of Public Safety, hears himself
reproached for being still alive: "He who was at Valenciennes when the
enemy took it will never reply to this question - are you dead?"[91]
He has nothing to do now but to declare himself incompetent, decline
the honor mistakenly conferred on him by the Convention, and
disappear.  - Dubois-Crancé took Lyons, and, as pay for this immense
service, he is stricken off the roll of the Jacobin Club; because he
did not take it quick enough, he is accused of treachery; two days
after the capitulation, the Committee of Public Safety withdraw his
powers; three days after the capitulation, the Committee of Public
Safety has him arrested and sent to Paris under escort.[92] - If such
men after such services are thus treated, what is to become of the
others? After the mission of young Julien, then Carrier at Nantes,
Ysabeau and Tallien at Bordeaux, feel their heads shake on their
shoulders; after the mission of Robespierre jr.  in the East and
South, Barras, Fréron and Bernard de Saintes believe themselves
lost.[93] Fouché, Rovère, Javogue, and how many others, compromised by
the faction, Hébertists or Dantonists, of which they are, or were
belonging.  Sure of perishing if their patrons on the Committee
succumb; not sure of living if their patrons keep their place; not
knowing whether their heads will not be exchanged for others;
restricted to the narrowest, the most rigorous and most constant
orthodoxy; guilty and condemned should their orthodoxy of to-day
become the heterodoxy of to-morrow.  All of them menaced, at first the
hundred and eighty autocrats who, before the concentration of the
revolutionary government, ruled for eight months boundlessly in the
provinces; next, and above all, the fifty hard-fisted "Montagnards,"
unscrupulous fanatics or authoritarian high livers, who, at this
moment, tread human flesh under foot and spread out in arbitrariness
like wild boars in a forest, or wallow in scandal, like swine in a
mud-pool.

There is no refuge for them, other than temporary, and temporary
refuge only in zealous and tried obedience, such as the Committee
demands proof of, that is to say, through rigor.  - "The Committees so
wanted it," says later on Maignet, the arsonist of Bédouin; "The
Committees did everything.  .  .  .  .  Circumstances controlled me.
.  .  .  .  The patriotic agents conjured me not to give way.  .  .  .
.  I did not fully carry out the most imperative orders."[94] Similarly,
the great exterminator of Nantes, Carrier, when urged to spare the
rebels who surrendered of their own accord:

"Do you want me to be guillotined? It is not in my power to save those
people."[95]

And another time:

       "I have my orders; I must observe them; I do not want to have
my head cut off!"

Under penalty of death, the representative on mission is a Terrorist,
like his colleagues in the Convention and on the Committee of Public
Safety, but with a much more serious disturbance of his nervous and
his moral system; for he does not operate like them on paper, at a
distance, against categories of abstract, anonymous and vague beings;
his work is not merely an effort of the intellect, but also of the
senses and the imagination.  If he belongs to the region, like
Lecarpentier, Barras, Lebon, Javogue, Couthon, André Dumont and many
others, he is well acquainted with the families he proscribes; names
to him are not merely so many letters strung together, but they recall
personal souvenirs and evoke living forms.  At all events, he is the
spectator, artisan and beneficiary of his own dictatorship; the
silver-plate and money he confiscates passes under his eye, through
his hands; he sees the "suspects" he incarcerates march before him; he
is in the court-room on the rendering of the sentence of death;
frequently, the guillotine he has supplied with heads works under his
windows; he sleeps in the mansion of an emigré he makes requisitions
for the furniture, linen and wine belonging to the decapitated and the
imprisoned,[96] lies in their beds, drinks their wine and revels with
plenty of company at their expense, and in their place.  In the same
way as a bandit chief who neither kills nor robs with his own hands,
but has murder and robbery committed in his presence, by which he
substantially profits, not by proxy, but personally, through the well-
directed blows ordered by him.  - To this degree, and in such
proximity to physical action, omnipotence is a noxious atmosphere
which no state of health can resist.  Restored to the conditions which
poisoned man in barbarous times or countries, he is again attacked by
moral maladies from which he was thenceforth believed to be exempt; he
retrogrades even to the strange corruptions of the Orient and the
Middle Ages; forgotten leprosies, apparently extinct, with exotic
pestilences to which civilized lands seemed closed, reappear in his
soul with their issues and tumors.

VII.  Brutal Instincts.

Eruption of brutal instincts.  - Duquesnoy at Metz.  - Dumont at
Amiens.  - Drunkards.  - Cusset, Bourbotte, Moustier, Bourdon de
l'Oise, Dartigoyte.

"It seems," says a witness who was long acquainted with Maignet, "that
all he did for these five or six years was simply the delirious phase
of an illness, after which he recovered, and lived on as if nothing
had happened."[97] And Maignet himself writes "I was not made for
these tempests." That goes for everyone but especially for the coarser
natures; subordination would have restrained them while dictatorial
power make the instincts of the brute and the mob appear.

Contemplate Duquesnoy, a sort of mastiff, always barking and biting,
when gorged he is even more furious.  Delegate to the army of the
Moselle, and passing by Metz[98] he summoned before him Altmayer, the
public prosecutor, although he had sat down to dinner.  The latter
waits three hours and a half in the ante-chamber, is not admitted,
returns, and, at length received, is greeted with a thundering
exclamation:

 "Who are you?"

 "The public prosecutor," he replies.

"You look like a bishop - you were once a curé or monk - you can't be
a revolutionary .  .  .  .  I have come to Metz with unlimited powers.
Public opinion here is not satisfactory.  I am going to drill it.  I
am going to set folks straight here.  I mean to shoot, here in Metz,
as well as in Nancy, five or six hundred every fortnight."

The same at the house of General Bessières, commandant of the town
encountering there M. Cledat, an old officer, the second in command,
he measures him from head to foot:

"You look like a muscadin.  Where did you come from? You must be a bad
republican - you look as if you belonged to the ancient régime."

 "My hair is gray," he responds, "but I am not the less a good
republican: you may ask the General and the whole town."

 "Be off! Go to the devil, and be quick about it, or I will have you
arrested!" -

 The same, in the street, where he lays hold of a man passing, on
account of his looks; the justice of the peace, Joly, certifies to the
civism of this person, and he "eyes" Joly:

 "You too, you are an aristocrat! I see it in your eyes! I never make
a mistake."

Whereupon, tearing off the Judge's badge, he sends him to prison.  -
Meanwhile, a fire, soon extinguished, breaks out in the army bakery;
officers, townspeople, laborers, peasants and even children form a
line (for passing water) and Duquesnoy appears to urge them on in his
way: using his fists and his foot, he falls on whoever he meets, on an
employee in the commissariat, on a convalescent officer, on two men in
the line, and many others.  He shouts to one of them, "You are a
muscadin!" To another:

"I see by your eyes that you are an aristocrat!"

To another:

"You are a bloody beggar, an aristocrat, a rascal,"

and he strikes him in the stomach; he seizes a fourth by his collar
and throws him down on the pavement.[99] In addition to this, all are
imprisoned.  The fire being extinguished, an indiscreet fellow, who
stood by looking on, recommends " the dispenser of blows "to wipe his
forehead." "You can't see straight - who are you? Answer me, I am the
representative." The other replies mildly: "Representative, nothing
could be more respectable." Duquesnoy gives the unlucky courtier a
blow under the nose: "You are disputing - go to prison," " which I did
at once," adds the docile subject.  - That same evening, "whereas, in
the conflagration, none of the inhabitants in good circumstances
offered their services in extinguishing the fire,[100] and none but
sans-culottes came thereto, from the garrison as well as from the
commune," Duquesnoy orders "that a tax of 40,000 livres be imposed on
the commune of Metz, levied on the fortunes of the rich and
distributed among the poor, payable within ten days."[101] -- "Fais-
moi f....  dedans tous ces b...  là[102]," "quatre j...f...  à
raccourcir;"[103] At Arras, as at Metz, the lout is ever the ruffian
and the butcher.

 Others are either jolly fellows, or blackguards.  A certain André
Dumont, an old village attorney, now king of Picardie, or sultan, as
occasion offers, "figures as a white Negro," sometimes jovial, but
generally as a rude hardened cynic, treating female prisoners and
petitioners as in a kermesse.[104] - One morning a lady enters his
ante-room, and waits amidst about twenty sans-culottes, to solicit the
release of her husband.  Dumont appears in a morning-gown, seats
himself and listens to the petitioner.

 "Sit down, citoyenne."

He takes her on his lap, thrusts his hand in her bosom and exclaims:

"Who would suppose that the bust of a marchioness would feel so soft
to one of the people's representatives."

The sans-culottes shout with laughter.  He sends the poor woman away
and keeps her husband locked up.  In the evening he may write to the
Convention that he investigates things himself, and closely examines
aristocrats.  - If one is to maintain the revolutionary enthusiasm at
a high level it is helpful to have a drop too much in one's head, and
most of them take precautions in this direction.  At Lyons,[105] "the
representatives sent to ensure the people's welfare, Albitte and
Collot," call upon the Committee of Sequestrations to deliver at their
house two hundred bottles of the best wine to be found, and five
hundred bottles more of Bordeaux red wine, first quality, for table
use.  - In three months, at the table of the representatives who
devastate la Vendée, nineteen hundred and seventy-four bottles of wine
are emptied,[106] taken from the houses of the emigrés belonging to
the town; for, "when one has helped to preserve a commune one has a
right to drink to the Republic." Representative Bourbotte presides at
this bar; Rossignol touches his glass, an ex-jeweler and then a
September massacreur, all his life a debauchee and brigand, and now a
major-general; alongside of Rossignol, stand his adjutants, Grammont,
an old actor, and Hazard, a former priest; along with them is
Vacheron, a good républican, who ravishes women and shoots them when
they refuse to succumb;[107] in addition to these are some "brilliant"
young ladies, undoubtedly brought from Paris, "the prettiest of whom
share their nights between Rossignol and Bourbotte," whilst the others
serve their subordinates: the entire band, male and female, is installed
in a Hotel de Fontenay, where they begin by breaking the seals, so as t
o confiscate "for their own benefit, furniture, jewelry, dresses,
feminine trinkets and even porcelains."[108] Meanwhile, at Chantonney,
representative Bourdon de l'Oise drinks with General Tunck, becomes "
frantic" when tipsy, and has patriotic administrators seized in their
beds at midnight, whom he had embraced the evening before.  - Nearly
all of them, like the latter, get nasty after a few drinks, - Carrier
at Nantes, Petit-Jean at Thiers, Duquesnoy at Arras, Cusset at
Thionville, Monestier at Tarbes.  At Thionville, Cusset drinks like
a "Lapithe" and, when drunk, gives the orders of a "vizier," which
orders are executed.[109]  At Tarbes, Monestier "after a heavy meal
and much excited," warmly harangues the court, personally examines
the prisoner, M. de Lasalle, an old officer, whom he has condemned
to death, and signs the order to have him guillotined at once.  M.
de Lasalle is guillotined that very evening, at midnight, by torchlight.
The following morning Monestier says to the president of the court:
"Well, we gave poor Lasalle a famous fright last night, didn't we ?"
"How a famous fright? He is executed !" Monestier is astonished - he
did not remember having issued the order.[110] - With others, wine,
besides sanguinary instincts, brings out the foulest instincts.  At
Nîmes; Borie, in the uniform of a representative, along with Courbis,
the mayor, Géret, the justice and a number of prostitutes, dance the
farandole around the guillotine.  At Auch, one of the worst tyrants in
the South, Dartigoyte, always heated with liquor "vomited every species
of obscenity " in the faces of women that came to demand justice; "he
compels, under penalty of imprisonment, mothers to take their daughters
to the popular club," to listen to his filthy preaching; one evening, at
the theatre, probably after an orgy, he shouts at all the women between
the acts, lets loose upon them his smutty vocabulary, and, by way of
demonstration, or as a practical conclusion, ends by stripping himself
naked.[111] - This time, the genuine brute appears.  All the clothing
woven during the past centuries and with which civilization had dressed
him, the last drapery of humanity, falls to the ground.  Nothing remains
but the primitive animal, the ferocious, lewd gorilla supposed to be
tamed, but which still subsists indefinitely and which a dictatorship,
joined to drunkenness, revives in an uglier guise than in remotest times.


VIII.  Delirium.

Approach of madness.  - Loss of common-sense.  - Fabre, Gaston,
Guiter, in the army of the Eastern Pyrenees.  - Baudot, Lebas, Saint-
Just, and the predecessors and successors in the army of the Rhine.  -
Furious excitement.  - Lebon at Arras, and Carrier at Nantes.

If intoxication is needed to awaken the brute, a dictatorship suffices
to arouse the madman.  The mental equilibrium of most of these new
sovereigns is disturbed; the distance between what the man once was
and what he now is, is too great.  Formerly he was a petty lawyer,
village doctor, or schoolmaster, an unknown mover of a resolution in a
local club, and only yesterday he was one voter in the Convention out
of seven hundred and fifty.  Look at him now, the arbiter, in one of
the departments, of all fortunes and liberties, and master of five
thousand lives.  Like a pair of scales into which a disproportionate
weight has been thrown, his reason totters on the side of pride.  Some
of them regard their competency unlimited, like their powers, and
having just joined the army, claim the right of being appointed major-
generals.[112]  "Declare officially," writes Fabre to the Committee of
Public Safety,[113] "that, in future, generals shall be simply the
lieutenants of the delegates to the Convention." Awaiting the required
declaration, they claim command and, in reality, exercise it.  "I know
of neither generals nor privates," says Gaston, a former justice of
the peace, to the officers; "as to the Minister, he is like a bull in
a china shop; I am in command here and must be obeyed." "What are
generals good for?" adds his colleague Guiter; "the old women in our
faubourgs know as much as they do.  Plans, formal maneuvers, tents,
camps, redoubts? All this is of no use! The only war suitable to
Frenchmen after this will be a rush with side arms." To turn out of
office, guillotine, disorganize, march blindly on, waste lives
haphazard, force defeat, sometimes get killed themselves, is all they
know, and they would lose all if the effects of their incapacity and
arrogance were not redeemed by the devotion of the officers and the
enthusiasm of the soldiers.  - The same spectacle is visible at
Charleroy where, through his absurd orders, Saint-Just does his best
to compromise the army, leaving that place with the belief that he is
a great man.[114]  - There is the same spectacle in Alsace, where
Lacoste, Baudot, Ruamps, Soubrany, Muhaud, Saint-Just and Lebas,
through their excessive rigor, do their best to break up the army and
then boast of it.  The revolutionary Tribunal is installed at
headquarters, soldiers are urged to denounce their officers, the
informer is promised money and secrecy, he and the accused are not
allowed to confront each other, no investigation, no papers allowed,
even to make exception to the verdict - a simple examination without
any notes, the accused arrested at eight o'clock, condemned at nine
o'clock, and shot at ten o'clock.[115]

Naturally, under such a system, no one wants to command; already,
before Saint Just's arrival, Meunier had consented to act as Major-
General only ad interim; "every hour of the day" he demanded his
removal; unable to secure this, he refused to issue any order.  The
representatives, to procure his successor, are obliged to descend down
to a depot captain, Carlin, bold enough or stupid enough to allow
himself to take a commission under their lead, which was a commission
for the guillotine.  - If such is their presumption in military
matters, what must it be in civil affairs! On this side there is no
external check, no Spanish or German army capable of at once taking
them in flagrante delicto, and of profiting by their ambitious
incapacity and mischievous interference.  Whatever the social
instrumentality may be - judiciary, administration, credit, commerce,
manufactures, agriculture - they can dislocate and destroy it with
impunity.  - They never fail to do this, and, moreover, in their
dispatches, they take credit to themselves for the ruin they cause.
That, indeed, is their mission; otherwise, they would be regarded as
bad Jacobins; they would soon become "suspects;" they rule only on
condition of being infatuated and destructive; the overthrow of
common-sense is with them an act of State grace, a necessity of the
office, and, on this common ground of compulsory unreason, every
species of physical delirium may be set established.

With those that we can follow closely, not only is their judgment
perverted, but the entire nervous apparatus is affected; a permanent
over-excitement and a morbid restlessness has begun.  - Consider
Joseph Lebon, son of a sergeant-at-arms, subsequently, a teacher with
the Oratoriens of Beaune, next, curé of Neuville-Vitasse, repudiated
as an interloper by the élite of his parishioners, not respected,
without house or furniture, and almost without a flock.[116]  Two
years after this, finding himself sovereign of his province, his head
is spinning.  Lesser events would have made it turn; his is only a
twenty-eight-year-old head, not very solid, without any inside
ballast,[117] already disturbed by vanity, ambition, rancor, and
apostasy, by the sudden and complete volteface which puts him in
conflict with his past educational habits and most cherished
affections: it breaks down under the vastness and novelty of this
greatness.  - In the costume of a representative, a Henry IV hat, tri-
color plume, waving scarf, and saber dragging the ground, Lebon orders
the bell to be rung and summons the villagers into the church, where,
aloft in the pulpit in which he had formerly preached in a threadbare
cassock, he displays his metamorphosis.

"Who would believe that I should have returned here with unlimited
powers!"[118]

And that, before his counterfeit majesty, each person would be humble,
bowed down and silent! To a member of the municipality of Cambray who,
questioned by him, looked straight at him and answered curtly, and
who, to a query twice repeated in the same terms, dared to answer
twice in the same terms, he says:

 "Shut up ! You disrespect me, you do not behave properly to the
national representative."

He immediately commits him to prison.[119] - One evening, at the
theater, he enters a box in which the ladies, seated in front, keep
their places.  In a rage, he goes out, rushes on the stage and,
brandishing his great saber, shouts and threatens the audience, taking
immense strides across the boards and acting and looking so much like
a wild beast that several of the ladies faint away:

 "Look there !" he shouts, at those muscadines who do not condescend
to move for a representative of twenty-five millions of men! Everybody
used to make way for a prince - they will not budge for me, a
representative, who am more than a king!"[120]

The word is spoken.  But this king is frightened, and he is one who
thinks of nothing but conspiracy;[121] in the street, in open
daylight, the people who are passing him are plotting against him
either by words or signs.  Meeting in the main street of Arras a young
girl and her mother talking Flemish, - that seems to him "suspect."
"Where are you going?" he demands.  "What's that to you?" replies the
child, who does not know him.  The girl, the mother and the father are
sent to prison.[122] - On the ramparts, another young girl,
accompanied by her mother, is taking the air, and reading a book.
"Give me that book," says the representative.  The mother hands it to
him; it is the " History of Clarissa Harlowe." The young girl,
extending her hand to receive back the book, adds, undoubtedly with a
smile: "That is not 'suspect.'" Lebon deals her a blow with his fist
on her stomach which knocks her down; both women are searched and he
personally leads them to the guard-room.  - The slightest expression,
a gesture, puts him beside himself; any motion that he does not
comprehend makes him start, as with an electric shock.  Just arrived
at Cambray, he is informed that a woman who had sold a bottle of wine
below the maximum, had been released after a procès-verbal.  On
reaching the Hotel-de-ville, he shouts out: "Let everybody here pass
into the Consistory!" The municipal officer on duty opens a door
leading into it.  Lebon, however, not knowing who he is, takes alarm.
"He froths at the mouth," says the municipal officer, "and cries out
as if possessed by a demon.  'Stop, stop, scoundrel, you are running
off!' He draws his saber and seizes me by the collar; I am dragged and
borne along by him and his men.  'I have hold of him, I have hold of
him!' he exclaims, and, indeed, he did hold me with his teeth, legs,
and arms, like a madman.  At last, 'scoundrel, monster, bastard,' says
he, 'are you a marquis?' ' No,' I replied, 'I am a sans-culotte.' 'Ah,
well people, you hear what he says,' he exclaims, 'he says that he is
a sans-culotte, and that is the way he greets a denunciation on the
maximum! I remove him.  Let him be kicked in prison!'"[123] It is
certain that the King of Arras and Cambray is not far from a raging
fever; with such symptoms an ordinary individual would be sent to an
asylum.

Not so vain, less fond of parading his royalty, but more savage and
placed in Nantes amidst greater dangers, Carrier, under the pressure
of more somber ideas, is much more furious and constant in his
madness.  Sometimes his attacks reach hallucination.  "I have seen
him," says a witness, "so carried away in the tribune, in the heat of
his harangue when trying to overrule public opinion, as to cut off the
tops of the candles with his saber," as if they were so many
aristocrats' heads.[124]  Another time, at table, after having
declared that France could not feed its too numerous population, and
that it was decided to cut down the excess, all nobles, magistrates,
priests, merchants, etc., he becomes excited and exclaims, "Kill,
kill!" as if he were already engaged in the work and ordering the
operation.[125]  Even when fasting, and in an ordinary condition, he
is scarcely more cooled down.  When the administrators of the
department come to consult with him,[126] they gather around the door
to see if he looks enraged, and is in a condition to hear them.  He
not only insults petitioners, but likewise the functionaries under him
who make reports to him, or take his orders; his foul nature rises to
his lips and overflows in the vilest terms:

"Go to hell and be damned.  I have no time."[127]

They consider themselves lucky if they get off with a volley of
obscene oaths, for he generally draws his saber:

"The first bastard that mentions supplies, I will cut his head
off."[128]

And to the president of the military commission, who demands that
verdicts be rendered before ordering executions:

"You, you old rascal, you old bastard, you want verdicts, do you! Go
ahead! If the whole pen is not emptied in a couple of hours I will
have you and your colleagues shot!"

His gestures, his look have such a powerful effect upon the mind that
the other, who is also a "bruiser," dies of the shock a few days
after.[129]  Not only does he draw his saber, but he uses it; among
the petitioners, a boatman, whom he is about to strike, runs off as
fast as he can; he draws General Moulins into the recess of a window
and gives him a cut.[130] - People "tremble" on accosting him, and yet
more in contradicting him.  The envoy of the Committee of Public
Safety, Julien de la Drôme, on being brought before him, takes care to
" stand some distance off, in a corner of the room," wisely trying to
avoid the first spring; wiser still, he replies to Carrier's
exclamations with the only available argument:

"If you put me out of the way to-day, you yourself will be guillotined
within a week!"[131]

On coming to a stand before a mad dog one must aim the knife straight
at its throat; there is no other way to escape its fangs and slaver.
Accordingly, with Carrier, as with a mad dog, the brain is mastered by
the steady mechanical reverie, by persistent images of murder and
death.  He exclaims to President Tronjolly, apropos of the Vendean
children:

"The guillotine, always the guillotine!"[132]

In relation to the drownings:

 "You judges must have verdicts; pitch them into the water, which is
much more simple."

Addressing the popular club of Nantes, he says:

 "The rich, the merchants, are all monopolizers, all anti-
revolutionists; denounce them to me, and I will have all their heads
under the national razor.  Tell me who the fanatics are that shut
their shops on Sunday and I will have them guillotined." "When will
the heads of those rascally merchants fall ? " - " I see beggars here
in rags; you are as big fools at Ancenis as at Nantes.  Don't you know
that the money, the wealth of these old merchants, belongs to you, and
is not the river there?" "My brave bastards, my good sansculottes your
time is come! Denounce them to me! The evidence of two good sans-
culottes is all I want to make the heads of those old merchants
tumble! " -  "We will make France a grave-yard rather than not
regenerate it in our own way."[133] - His steady howl ends in a cry of
anguish:

"We shall all be guillotined, one after the other!"[134] -

Such is the mental state to which the office of representative on
mission leads.  Below Carrier, who is on the extreme verge, the
others, less advanced, likewise turn pale at the lugubrious vision,
which is the inevitable effect of their work and their mandate.
Beyond every grave they dig, they catch a glimpse of the grave already
dug for them.  There is nothing left for the gravedigger but to dig
mechanically day after day, and, in the meantime, make what he can out
of his place; he can at least render himself insensible by having "a
good time."

IX.  Vice.

The development of vice.  - Vanity and the need of gambling.  - Collot
d'Herbois, Ysabeau, Tallien.  - The Robbers.  - Tallien, Javogues,
Rovère, Fouché.  - Two sources of cruelty.  - Need of demonstrating
one's power.  - Saint-Just in the Pas-de-Calais department, and in
Alsace.  - Collot d'Herbois at Lyons.  - Pressure exercised by the
Representatives on the tribunals.  - Pleasure caused by death and
suffering.  - Monestier, Fouché, Collot d'Herbois, Lebon and Carrier.

Most of them follow this course, some instinctively and through
lassitude, and others because the display they make adds to their
authority.  "Dragged along in Carriages with six horses, surrounded by
guards, seated at sumptuous tables set for thirty persons, eating to
the sound of music along with a Cortege of actors, courtesans and
praetorians,"[135] they impress the imagination with an idea of their
omnipotence, and people bow all the lower because they make a grand
show.  - At Troyes, on the arrival of young Rousselin, cannon are
discharged as if for the entry of a prince.  The entire population of
Nevers is called upon to honor the birth of Fouché's child; the civil
and military authorities pay their respects to him, and the National
Guards are under arms.[136]  At Lyons, " The imposing display of
Collot d'Herbois resembles that of the Grand Turk.  It requires three
successive applications to obtain an audience; nobody approaches
nearer than a distance of fifteen feet; two sentinels with muskets
stand on each side of him, with their eyes fixed on the
petitioners."[137] - Less menacing, but not less imposing, is the pomp
which surrounds the representatives at Bordeaux; to approach them,
requires "a pass from the captain of the guards,"[138] through several
squads of sentinels.  One of them, Ysabeau, who, after having
guillotined to a considerable extent, has become almost tractable,
allows adulation, and, like a Duc de Richelieu coming down from
Versailles, tries to play the popular potentate, with all the luxuries
which the situation affords.  At the theaters, in his presence, they
give a ballet in which shepherds form with garlands of flowers the
words "Ysabeau, Liberty, Equality." He allows his portrait to pass
from hand to hand, and condescendingly smiles on the artist who
inscribes these words at the bottom of an engraving of the day: "An
event which took place under Ysabeau, representative of the people."
"When he passes in the street people take off their hats to him, cheer
him, and shout 'Hurrah for Ysabeau! Hurrah for the savior of Bordeaux,
our friend and father!' The children of aristocrats come and
apostrophize him in this way, even at the doors of his carriage; for
he has a Carriage, and several of them, with a coachman, horses, and
the equipage of a former noble, gendarmes preceding him everywhere,
even on excursions into the country," where his new courtiers call him
"great man," and welcome him with "Asiatic magnificence." There is
good cheer at his table, "superb white bread," called
"representatives' bread," whilst the country folk of the neighborhood
live on roots, and the inhabitants of Bordeaux can scarcely obtain
more than four ounces of musty bread per day.  - There is the same
feasting with the representatives at Lyons, in the midst of similar
distress.  In the reports made by Collot we find a list of bottles of
brandy at four francs each, along with partridges, capons, turkeys,
chickens, pike, and crawfish, note also the white bread, the other
kind, called "equality bread," assigned to simple mortals, offends
this august palate.  Add to this the requisitions made by Albitte and
Fouché, seven hundred bottles of fine wine, in one lot, another of
fifty pounds of coffee, one hundred and sixty ells of muslin, three
dozen silk handkerchiefs for cravats, three dozen pairs of gloves, and
four dozen pairs of stockings: they provide themselves with a good
stock.[139] - Among so many itinerant tyrants, the most audaciously
sensual is, I believe, Tallien, the Septembriseur at Paris and
guillotineur at Bordeaux, but still more rake and robber, caring
mostly for his palate and stomach.  Son of the cook of a grand
seignior, he is doubtless swayed by family traditions: for his
government is simply a larder where, like the head-butler in "Gil
Blas," he can eat and turn the rest into money.  At this moment, his
principal favorite is Teresa Cabarrus, a woman of society, or one of
the demi-monde, whom he took out of prison; he rides about the streets
with her in an open carriage, "with a courier behind and a courier in
front," sometimes wearing the red cap and holding a pike in her
hand,[140] thus exhibiting his goddess to the people.  And this is the
sentiment which does him the most credit; for, when the crisis comes,
the imminent peril of his mistress arouses his courage against
Robespierre, and this pretty woman, who is good-natured, begs him, not
for murders, but for pardons.[141] - Others, as gallant as he is, but
with less taste, obtain recruits for their pleasures in a rude way,
either as fast-livers on the wing, or because fear subjects the honor
of women to their caprices, or because the public funds defray the
expenses of their guard-room habits.  At Blois, for this kind of
expenditure, Guimberteau discharges his obligations by drafts on the
proceeds of the revolutionary tax.[142]  Carrier, at Nantes,
appropriates to himself the house and garden of a private person for
"his seraglio"; the reader may judge whether, on desiring to be a
third party in the household, the husband would make objections.  At
other times, in the hotel Henry IV., "with his friends and prostitutes
brought under requisition, he has an orgy;" he allows himself the same
indulgence on the galiot during the drownings; there at the end of a
drunken frolic, he is regaled with merry songs, for example, "la
gamelle":[143] he needs his amusements.

Some, who are shrewd, think of the more substantial and look out for
the future.  Foremost among these is Tallien, the king of robbers, but
prodigal, whose pockets, full of holes, are only filled to be at once
emptied; Javogues, who makes the most of Montbrison; Rovère, who, for
eighty thousand francs in assignats, has an estate adjudged to him
worth five hundred thousand francs in coin; Fouché, who, in Nièvre,
begins to amass the twelve or fourteen millions which he secures later
on;[144] and so many others, who were either ruined or impoverished
previous to the outbreak of the Revolution, and who are rich when it
ends: Barras with his domain of Gros Bois; André Dumont, with the
Hotel de Plouy, its magnificent furniture, and an estate worth four
hundred thousand livres; Merlin de Thionville, with his country-
houses, equipages, and domain of Mont-Valérien, and other domains;
Salicetti, Reubell, Rousselin, Chateauneuf-Randon, and the rest of the
gluttonous and corrupted members of the Directory.  Without mentioning
the taxes and confiscations of which they render no account, they
have, for their hoard, the ransoms offered underhandedly by "suspects"
and their families; what is more convenient?[145]  And all the more,
because the Committee of General Security, even when informed, let
things take their course: to prosecute "Montagnards," would be "making
the Revolution take a step backward." One is bound to humor useful
servants who have such hard work, like that of the September killings,
to do.  Irregularities, as with these September people, must be
overlooked; it is necessary to allow them a few perquisites and give
them gratuities.[146]

All this would not suffice to keep them at work if they had not been
held by an even greater attraction.  - To the common run of civilized
men, the office of Septembriseur is at first disagreeable; but, after
a little practice, especially with a tyrannical nature, which, under
cover of the theory, or under the pretext of public safety, can
satiate its despotic instincts, all repugnance subsides.  There is
keen delight in the exercise of absolute power; one is glad, every
hour, to assert one's omnipotence and prove it by some act, the most
conclusive of all acts being some act of destruction.  The more
complete, radical and prompt the destruction is, the more conscious
one is of one's strength.  However great the obstacle, one is not
disposed to recede or stand still; one breaks away all the barriers
which men call good sense, humanity, justice, and the satisfaction of
breaking them down is great.  To crush and to subdue becomes
voluptuous pleasure, to which pride gives keener relish, affording a
grateful incense of the holocaust which the despot consumes on his own
altar; at this daily sacrifice, he is both idol and priest, offering
up victims to himself that he may be conscious of his divinity.  -
Such is Saint-Just, all the more a despot because his title of
representative on mission is supported by his rank on the Committee of
Public Safety: to find natures strained to the same pitch as his, we
must leave the modern world and go back to a Caligula, or to a caliph
Hakem in Egypt in the tenth century.[147]  He also, like these two
monsters, but with different formulae, regards himself as a God, or
God's vicegerent on earth, invested with absolute power through Truth
incarnated in him, the representative of a mysterious, limitless and
supreme power, known as the People; to worthily represent this power,
it is essential to have a soul of steel.[148]  Such is the soul of
Saint-Just, and only that.  All other sentiments merely serve to
harden it; all the metallic agencies that compose it - sensuality,
vanity, every vice, every species of ambition, all the frantic
outbursts and melancholy vaporings of his youth - are violently
commingled and fused together in the revolutionary mold, so that his
soul may take the form and rigidity of trenchant steel.  Suppose this
an animated blade, feeling and willing in conformity with its temper
and structure; it would delight in being brandished, and would need to
strike; such is the need of Saint-Just.  Taciturn, impassible, keeping
people at a distance, as imperious as if the entire will of the people
and the majesty of transcendent reason resided in his person, he seems
to have reduced his passions to the desire of dashing everything to
atoms, and to creating dismay.  It may be said of him that, like the
conquering Tartars, he measures his self-attributed grandeur by what
he fells; no other has so extensively swept away fortunes, liberties
and lives; no other has so terrifically heightened the effect of his
deeds by laconic speech and the suddenness of the stroke.  He orders
the arrest and close confinement of all former nobles, men and women,
in the four departments, in twenty-four hours; he orders the
bourgeoisie of Strasbourg to pay over nine millions in twenty-four
hours; ten thousand persons in Strasbourg must give up their shoes in
twenty-four hours; random and immediate discharges of musketry on the
officers of the Rhine army - such are the measures.[149]  So much the
worse for the innocent; there is no time to discern who they are; "a
blind man hunting for a pin in a dust-heap takes the whole heap."[150]
- And, whatever the order, even when it cannot be executed, so much
the worse for him to whom it is given, for the captain who, directed
by the representative to establish this or that battery in a certain
time, works all night with all his forces, "with as many men as the
place will hold."[151] The battery not being ready at the hour named,
Saint-Just sends the captain to the guillotine.  - The sovereign
having once given an order it cannot be countermanded; to take back
his words would be weakening himself;[152] in the service of
omnipotence, pride is insatiable, and, to mollify it, no barbaric act
is too great.  - The same appetite is visible in Collot d'Herbois,
who, no longer on the stage, plays before the town the melo-dramatic
tyrant with all becoming ostentation.  One morning, at Lyons, he
directs the revolutionary Tribunal to arrest, examine and sentence a
youthful "suspect" before the day is over.  "Towards six o'clock,[153]
Collot being at table enjoying an orgy with prostitutes, buffoons and
executioners, eating and drinking to choice music, one of the judges
of the Tribunal enters; after the usual formalities, he is led up to
the Representative, and informs him that the young man had been
arrested and examined, and the strictest inquiries made concerning
him; he is found irreproachable and the Court decided to set him free.
Collot, without looking at the judge, raises his voice and says to
him:

"I ordered you to punish that young man and I want him out of the way
before night.  If the innocent are spared, too many of the guilty will
escape.  Go."

The music and gaiety begin again, and in an hour the young man is
shot." - And so in most of the other pachalics; if any head mentally
condemned by the pacha escapes or does not fall soon enough, the
latter is indignant at the delays and forms of justice, also against
the judges and juries, often selected by himself.  Javogues writes an
insulting letter to the commission of Feurs which has dared acquit two
former nobles.  Laignelot, Lecarpentier, Michaud, Monestier, Lebon,
dismiss, recompose, or replace the commissions of Fontenoy, Saint-
Malo, and Perpignan, and the tribunals of Pau, Nîmes, and Arras, whose
judgments did not please them.[154] Lebon, Bernard de Saintes,
Dartigoyte and Fouché re-arrest prisoners on the same charge, solemnly
acquitted by their own tribunals.  Bô, Prieur de la Marne, and Lebon,
send judges and juries to prison that do not always vote death.[155]
Barras and Fréron dispatch, from brigade to brigade, to the
revolutionary Tribunal in Paris, the public prosecutor and president
of the revolutionary Tribunal of Marseilles, for being indulgent to
anti-revolutionaries, because, out of five hundred and twenty-eight
prisoners, they guillotined only one hundred and sixty-two.[156] - To
contradict the infallible Representative! That of itself is an
offense.  He owes it to himself to punish those who are not docile, to
re-arrest absolved delinquents, and to support cruelty with cruelty.

When for a long time someone has been imbibing a strong and nauseating
drink, not only does the palate get accustomed, but it often acquires
a taste for it; it soon wants to have it stronger; finally, it
swallows it pure, completely raw, with no admixture or condiment to
disguise its repulsiveness - Such, to certain imaginations, is the
spectacle of human gore; after getting accustomed to it they take
delight in seeing it.  Lequinio, Laignelot and Lebon invite the
executioner to dine with them;[157] Monestier, "with his cut-throats,
is going himself in search of prisoners in the dungeons, so that he
may accompany them to the Tribunal and overwhelm them with charges, if
they are disposed to defend themselves; after their condemnation, he
attends in uniform" at their execution.[158]  Fouché, lorgnette in
hand, looks out of his window upon a butchery of two hundred and ten
Lyonnese.  Collot, Laporte and Fouché feast together in a large
company on the days when executions by shooting takes place, and, at
each discharge, stand up and cheer lustily, waving their hats.[159]
At Toulon, Fréron, in person, orders and sees executed, the first
grand massacre on the Champ de Mars.[160] - On the Place d'Arras, M.
de Vielfort, already tied and stretched out on the plank, awaits the
fall of the knife.  Lebon appears on the balcony of the theatre, makes
a sign to the executioner to stop, opens the newspaper, and, in a loud
voice, reads off the recent successes of the French armies; then,
turning to the condemned man, exclaims: "Go, wretch, and take the news
of our victories to your brethren."[161] At Feurs, where the shootings
take place at the house of M. du Rosier, in the great avenue of the
park, his daughter, quite a young woman, advances in tears to
Javogues, and asks for the release of her husband.  "Oh, yes, my
dear," replies Javogues, "you shall have him home to-morrow." In
effect, the next day, her husband is shot, and buried in the
avenue.[162] - It is evident that they get to liking the business.
Like their September predecessors, they find amusement in murdering:
people around them allude gaily to "the red theater" and "the national
razor." An aristocrat is said to be "putting his head at the national
window," and "he has put his head through the cathole."[163]  They
themselves have the style and humor of their trade.  "To-morrow, at
seven o'clock," writes Hugues, "let the sacred guillotine be erected!"
- "The demoiselle guillotine," writes Lecarlier, "keeps steadily
agoing."[164] - "The relatives and friends of emigrés and of
refractory priests," writes Lebon, "monopolize the guillotine.  .
.[165]   Day before yesterday, the sister of the former Comte de
Bethune sneezed in the sack." Carrier loudly proclaims "the pleasure
he has derived" from seeing priests executed: "I never laughed in my
life as I did at the faces they made in dying."[166]  This is the
extreme perversity of human nature, that of a Domitian who watches the
features of the condemned, to see the effect of suffering, or, better
still, that of the savage who holds his sides with laughter at the
aspect of a man being impaled.  And this delight of contemplating
death throes, Carrier finds it in the sufferings of children.
Notwithstanding the remonstrances of the revolutionary Tribunal and
the entreaties of President Phélippes-Tronjolly,[167] he signs on the
29th of Frimaire, year II., a positive order to guillotine without
trial twenty-seven persons, of whom seven are women, and, among these,
four sisters, Mesdemoiselles de la Metayrie, one of these twenty-eight
years old, another twenty-seven, the third twenty-six, and the fourth
seventeen.  Two days before, notwithstanding the remonstrances of the
same tribunal and the entreaties of the same president, he signed a
positive order to guillotine twenty-six artisans and farm-hands, among
them two boys of fourteen, and two of thirteen years of age.  He was
driven " in a cab to the place of execution and he followed it up in
detail.  He could hear one of the children of thirteen, already bound
to the board, but too small and having only the top of the head under
the knife, ask the executioner, "Will it hurt me much?" What the
triangular blade fell upon may be imagined! Carrier saw this with his
own eyes, and whilst the executioner, horrified at himself, died a few
days after in consequence of what he had done, Carrier put another in
his place, began again and continued operations.
________________________________________________________________________
Notes:


[1] Thibaudeau: "Mémoires," I., 47, 70.  - Durand-Maillane,
"Mémoires," 183.  - Vatel, "Charlotte Corday et les Girondins," II.,
269.  Out of the seventy-six presidents of the convention eighteen
were guillotined, eight deported, twenty-two declared outlaws, six
incarcerated, three who committed suicide, and four who became insane,
in all sixty-one.  All who served twice perished by a violent death.

[2] Moniteur, XVIII., 38.  (Speech by Amar, reporter, Oct.  3.  '793.)
"The apparently negative behavior of the minority in the convention,
since the 2nd of June, is a new plot hatched by Barbaroux."

[3] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 44.  Election of Collot d'Herbois as
president by one hundred and fifty-one out of two hundred and forty-
one votes, June 13, 1793.-Moniteur, XVII., 366.  Election of Hérault-
Sechelles as president by one hundred and sixty-five out of two
hundred and thirty-six votes, Aug.  3, 1793.

[4] "The Revolution," vol.  III., ch.  I.  - Mortimer-Ternaux, VII.,
435.  (The three substitutes obtain, the first, nine votes, the
second, six votes, and the third, five votes.)

[5] Marcelin Boudet, "Les conventionnels d' Auvergne," 206.

[6] Le Marais or the Swamp (moderate party in the French Revolution).
SR.

[7] Dussault: " Fragment pour servir a' l'histoire de la convention."

[8] Sainte-Beuve "causeries du Lundi," V., 216.  (According to the
unpublished papers of Siéyès.)

[9] Words of Michelet.

[10] Moniteur, XX., 95, 135.  (Sessions of Germinal II.  in the
Convention and at the Jacobin club.)

[11] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 17.  (Sessions of Ventôse 26, year II.
Speech of Robespierre.) "In what country has a powerful senate ever
sought in its own bosom for the betrayers of the common cause and
handed them over to the sword of the law? Who has ever furnished the
world with this spectacle? You, my fellow citizens."

[12] Miot de Melito, "Mémoires," I.  44.  Danton, at table in the
ministry of Foreign Affairs, remarked: "The Révolution, like Saturn,
eats its own children." As to Camille Desmoulins, "His melancholy
already indicated a presentiment of his fate; the few words he allowed
to escape him always turned on questions and observations concerning
the nature of punishment, inflicted on those condemned by the
revolutionary Tribunal and the best way of preparing oneself for that
event and enduring it."

[13] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 363.357.  (Police reports on the
deputies, Messidor 4, and following days.) - Vilate: "coups secrètes
de la Revolution du 9 et 10 Thermidor," a list designated by Barère.
- Denunciation by Lecointre.  (2nd ed.  p.13.)

[14] Thibaudeau, I., 47.  "Just as in ordinary times one tries to
elevate oneself, so does one strive in these times of calamity to
lower oneself and be forgotten, or atone for one's inferiority by
seeking to degrade oneself."

[15] Madame Roland: "Mémoires," I., 23.

[16] Archives Nationales, F.7, 31167.  This set of papers contains
five hundred and thirty-seven police reports, especially those of
Nivôse, year II.  The following is a sample Report of Nivôse 25, year
II.  "Being on a deputation to the convention, some colleagues took me
to dine in the old Breteuil gardens, in a large room with a nice
floor.  .  .  .  The bill-of-fare was called for, and I found that
after having eaten a ritz soup, some meat, a bottle of wine and two
potatoes, I had spent, as they told me, eight francs twelve sous,
because I am not rich.  'Foutre!' I say to them how much do the rich
pay here? .  .  .  It is well to state that I saw some deputies come
into this large hall, also former marquises, counts and knights of the
poniard of the ancient regime .  .  .  but I confess that I cannot
remember the true names of these former nobles .  .  .  .  for the
devil himself could not recognize those bastards, disguised like sans-
culottes."

[17] Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 237, 308.  (July 5 and 14, 1793.) -
Moniteur, XIX., 716.  (Ventôse 26, year II.) Danton secures the
passage of a decree "that nothing but prose shall be heard at the
bar." Nevertheless, after his execution, this sort of parade begins
again.  On the 12th of Messidor, "a citizen admitted to the bar reads
a poem composed by him in honor of the success of our arms on the
Sambre." (Moniteur, XVI., 101.)

[18] Moniteur, XVIII.  369, 397, 399, 420, 455, 469, 471, 479, 488,
492, 500, etc.  - Mercier, "Le Nouveau Paris," II., 96.  - Dauban, "La
Demagogie en 1793," 500, 505.  (Articles by Prudhomme and Diurnal by
Beaulieu.)

[19] Moniteur, XVIII., 420, 399.  - "Ah, le bel oiseau," was a song
chosen for its symbolic and double meaning, one pastoral and the other
licentious.

[20] De Goncourt, "La Societé française pendant la Révolution," 418.
(Article from" Pêre Duchesne ".) - Dauban, ibid., 506.  (Article by
Prud'homme.) "Liberty on a seat of verdure, receives the homage of
republicans, male and female, .  .  .  and then.  .  .  .  she turns
and bestows a benevolent regard on her friends."

[21] Moniteur, XVIII., 399.  Session of Brumaire 20, on motion of
Thuriot: "I move that the convention attends the temple of Reason to
sing the hymn to Liberty." - "The motion of Thuriot is decreed."

[22] Mercier, ibid., 99.  (Similar scenes in the churches of St.
Eustache and St.  Gervais.)

[23] Durand-Maillane, '"Mémoires," 182.  - Gregoire, "Mémoires," II.,
34.  On the 7th of November, 1793, in the great scene of the
abjurations, Grégoire alone resisted, declaring: "I remain a bishop; I
invoke freedom of worship." "Outcries burst forth to stifle my voice
the pitch of which I raised proportionately.  .  .  .  A demoniac
scene occurred, worthy of Milton.  .  .  .  I declare that in making
this speech I thought I was pronouncing sentence of death on myself."
For several days, emissaries were sent to him, either deputies or
bandits, to try and make him retract.  On the 11th of November a
placard posted throughout Paris declared him responsible for the
continuance of fanaticism.  "For about two years, I was almost the
only one in Paris who wore the ecclesiastical costume."

[24] Moniteur, XVIII., 480.  (Session of Brumaire 30.) N...."I must
make known the ceremony which took place here to-day.  I move that the
speeches and details of this day be inserted in full in the bulletin,
and sent to all the departments." (Another deputy): "And do not
neglect to state that the Right was never so well furnished."
(Laughter and applause.)

[25] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 103.  (Germinal 11.) - Moniteur, XX.,
124.  (Germinal 15.) Decree for cutting short the defense of Danton
and his accused associates.

[26] Moniteur, XX., 226.  (Germinal 26.  Report by Saint-Just and
decree on the police.)- Ibid., XIX., 54.  (Report by Robespierre, and
decree on the principles of revolutionary government, Nivôse 5.) -
Ibid., XX., 567, 589.  Prairial 6, (Decree forbidding the imprisonment
of any Englishman or Hanoverian), and XXI., 13.  (Messidor 16.)

[27] Moniteur, XX., 544.  After the effort of L'Admiral against Collot
d'Herbois, the latter appears in the tribune.  "The loudest applause
greets him from all sides of the house." - Ibid., XXI., 173.
(Messidor 21.) On the report of Barère who praises the conduct of
Joseph Lebon, criticizing nothing but "somewhat harsh formalities," a
decree is passed to the order of the day, which is "adopted
unanimously with great applause."

[28] Moniteur, XX., 698, 715, 716, 719.  (Prairial 22 and 24.) After
the speeches of Robespierre and Couthon "Loud and renewed applause;
the plaudits begin over again and are prolonged." Couthon, having
declared that the Committee of Public Safety was ready to resign, "on
all sides there were cries of No, No."- Ibid., XXI., 268.  (Thermidor
2.) Eulogy of the revolutionary government by Barère and decree of the
police "unanimously adopted amidst the loudest applause."

[29] Moniteur, XXI., 329.

[30] Lafayette, "Mémoires," IV., 330.  "At last came the 9th of
Thermidor.  It was not due to people of common sense.  Their terror
was so great that an estimable deputy, to whom one of his colleagues
put the question, no witness being present, 'how long must we endure
this tyranny?' was upset by it to such a degree as to denounce him."

[31] Sainte-Beuve, "Causeries du Lundi," V., 209.  (Siéyès'
unpublished papers.)- Moniteur, XVIII., 631, containing an example of
both the terror and style of the most eminent men, among others of
Fourcroy the celebrated chemist, then deputy, and later, Counselor of
State and Minister of Public Instruction.  He is accused in the
Jacobin Club, Brumaire 18, year II., of not addressing the Convention
often enough, to which he replies: "After twenty years' devotion to
the practice of medicine I have succeeded in supporting my sans-
culotte father and my sans-culottes sisters.  .  .  .  As to the
charge made by a member that I have given most of my time to science.
.  .  .  I have attended the Lycée des Arts but three times, and then
only for the purpose of sans-culotteising it."

[32] Michelet, (1798-1874), "Histoire de la Révolution," V., preface
XXX (3rd ed.).  "When I was young and looking for a job, I was
referred to an esteemed Review, to a well-known philanthropist,
devoted to education, to the people, and to the welfare of humanity.
I found a very small man of a melancholic, mild and tame aspect.  We
were in front of the fire, on which he fixed his eyes without looking
at me.  He talked a long time, in a didactic, monotonous tone of
voice.  I felt ill at ease and sick at heart, and got away as soon as
I could.  It was this little man, I afterwards learned, who hunted
down the Girondists, and had them guillotined, and which he
accomplished at the age of twenty." - This man's name was Julien de la
Drôme.  I (Taine) saw him once when quite young.  He is well known;
first, through his correspondence, and next, by his mother's diary.
("Journal d'une bourgeoise pendant la Revolution," ed.  Locroy.) - We
have a sketch of David ("La Demagogie à Paris en 1793," by Dauban, a
fac-simile at the beginning of the volume), representing Queen Marie
Antoinette led to execution.  Madame Julien was at a window along with
David looking at the funeral convoy, whilst he made the drawing.  -
Madame Julien writes in her "Journal," September 3, 1792: "To attain
this end we must will the means.  No barbarous humanity! The people
are aroused, the people are avenging the crimes of the past three
years." - Her son, a sort of raw, sentimental Puritan, fond of
bloodshed, was one of Robespierre's most active agents.  He remembered
what he had done, as is evident by Michelet's narrative, and cast his
eyes down, well knowing that his present philanthropy could not
annihilate past acts.

[33] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 46.  Register of the Acts of the
Committee of Public Safety, vol.  II., orders of August 3, 1793.

[34] On the concentration and accumulation of business, cf.  Archives
Nationales, ibid., acts of Aug.  4, 5, 6, 1793; and AF.  II., 23, acts
of Brumaire I and 15, year II.  - On the distribution and dispatch of
business in the Committee and the hours devoted to it, see Acts of
April 6, June 13, 17, 18, Aug.  3, 1793, and Germinal 27, year II.  -
After August 3, two sessions were held daily, from 8 o'clock in the
morning to 1 o'clock in the afternoon, and from 7 to 10 o'clock in the
evening; at 10 o'clock, the Executive Council met with the Committee
of Public Safety, and papers were signed about 2 or 3 o'clock in the
morning.  - The files of AF.  II., 23 to 42, contain an account of the
doings of the Committee, the minutes of its meetings and of its
correspondence.  A perusal of these furnishes full details concerning
the initiative and responsibility of the Committee.  For example,
(Nivôse 4, year II., letters to Freron and Barras, at Marseilles,)
"The Committee commend the vigorous measures you have sanctioned in
your orders at Marseilles.  - Marseilles, through you, affords a great
example.  Accustomed, as you are, to wielding thunderbolts, you are
best calculated for still governing it.  .  .  How glorious, citizen
colleagues, to be able like you, after long continued labors and
immortal fame, how gratifying, under such auspices, to return to the
bosom of the National Convention! " - (AF.  II., 36, Pluviôse 7, year
II., letter to the representatives on mission at Bordeaux, approving
of the orders issued by them against merchants.) "concealed behind the
obscurity of its complots, mercantilism cannot support the ardent,
invigorating atmosphere of Liberty; Sybaritic indolence quails before
Spartan virtue.  " - (AF.  II., 37, Pluviôse 20, letter to Prieur de
la Marne, sent to Nantes to replace Carrier.) "Carrier, perhaps, has
been badly surrounded; .  ...  his ways are harsh, the means he
employs are not well calculated to win respect for the national
authority; .  .  .  he is used up in that city.  He is to leave and go
elsewhere." - (AF.  II., 36, Nivôse 21, letter to Fouché, Laporte, and
Albitte, at Commune-affranchie, signed by Billaud-Varennes and
composed by him.) "The convention, Nivôse I, has approved of the
orders and other measures taken by you.  We can add nothing to its
approval.  The Committee of Public Safety subjects all operations to
the same principles, that is to say, it conforms to yours and acts
with you."

[35] Sainte-Beuve, "Nouveaux Lundis," VIII., 105.  (Unpublished report
by Vice-admiral Villaret-Joyeuse, May 28, 1794.)

[36] Carnot, "Mémoires," I., 107.

[37] Ibid., I., 450, 523, 527, "we often ate only a morsel of dry
bread on the Committee's table."

[38] Moniteur, XXI., 362.  (Speech by Cambon, Session of Thermidor 11,
year II.)

[39] Beugnot, "Mémoires," II., 15.  (Stated by Jean Bon himself in a
conversation at Mayence in 1813.)

[40] Gaudia, duc de Gaéte, "Mémoires," I., 16, 28.  "I owed my life to
Cambon personally, while, through his firmness, he preserved the whole
Treasury department, continually attacked by the all-powerful Jacobin
club." - On the 8th of Thermidor, Robespierre was "very severe on the
administration of the Treasury, which he accused of an aristocratic
and anti-revolutionary spirit....  Under this pretext, it was known
that the orator meant to propose an act of accusation against the
representative charged with its surveillance, as well as against the
six commissioners, and bring them before the Revolutionary Tribunal,
whose verdict could not be doubtful." - Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 431,
436, 441.  Speech by Robespierre, Thermidor 8, year II.  .  .  ".
Machiavellian designs against the small fund-holders of the State.  .
.  .  A contemptible financial system, wasteful, irritating,
devouring, absolutely independent of your supreme oversight.  .  .  .
Anti-revolution exists in the financial department.  .  .  .  Who are
its head administrators? Brissotins, Feuillants, aristocrats and well-
known knaves - the Cambons, the Mallarmés, the Ramels!"

[41] Carnot, "Mémoires," I., 425.

[42] Moniteur, XXIV., 47, 50.  (Session of Germinal 2, year II.)
Speeches by Lindet and Carnot with confirmatory details.  - Lindet
says that he had signed twenty thousand papers.  - Ibid., XXXIII.,
591.  (Session of Ventôse 12, year III.  Speech by Barère.) "The labor
of the Committee was divided amongst the different members composing
it, but all, without distinction, signed each other's work.  I,
myself, knowing nothing of military affairs, have perhaps, in this
matter, given four thousand signatures." - Ibid., XXIV., 74.  (Session
of Germinal 6, year III.) Speech of Lavesseur, witness of an animated
scene between Carnot and Robespierre concerning two of Carnot's
clerks, arrested by order of Robespierre.  - Carnot adds " I had
myself signed this order of arrest without knowing it." - Ibid.,
XXII., 116.  (Session of Vendémiaire 8, year II., speech by Carnot in
narrating the arrest of General Huchet for his cruelties in Vendée.)
On appearing before the committee of Public Safety, Robespierre
defended him and he was sent back to the army and promoted to a higher
rank; I was obliged to sign in spite of my opposition."

[43] Carnot, "Mémoires," I., 572.  (Speech by Carnot, Germinal 2, year
III.)

[44] Sénart, "Mémoires," 145, 153.  (Details on the members of the two
Committees.)

[45] Reports by Billaud on the organization of the revolutionary
government, November 18, 1793 and on the theory of democratic
government, April 20, 1794.  - Reports by Robespierre on the political
situation of the Republic, November 17, 1793; and on the principles of
revolutionary government, December 5, 1793.  - Information on the
genius of revolutionary laws, signed principally by Robespierre and
Billaud, November 29, 1793.  - Reports by Robespierre on the
principles of political morality which ought to govern the Convention,
February 5, 1794; and on the relationship between religious and moral
ideas and republican principles, May 7, 1794.

[46] Billaud no longer goes on mission after he becomes one of the
Committee of Public Safety.  Robespierre never went.  Barère, who is
of daily service, is likewise retained at Paris.  - All the others
serve on the missions and several repeatedly, and for a long time.

[47] Moniteur, XXIV., 60.  The words of Carnot, session of Germinal 2,
year III.- Ibid., XXII., 138, words of Collot, session of Vendémiaire
12, year III.  "Billaud and myself have sent into the departments
three hundred thousand written documents, and have made at least ten
thousand minutes (of meetings) with our own hand."

[48] Dussault "Fragment pour servir à l'histoire de la Convention."

[49] Thibaudeau, I., 49.

[50] Arnault, "Souvenirs d'un Sexagenaire," II., 78.

[51] "Mémoires d'un Bourgeois de Paris," by Veron, II., 14.  (July 7,
1815.)

[52] Cf.  Thibaudeau, "Mémoires," I., 46.  "It seemed, then, that to
escape imprisonment, or the scaffold, there was no other way than to
put others in your place."

[53] Carnot, "Mémoires." I., 508.

[54] Carnot, I., 527.  (Words of Prieur de la Côte d'Or.)

[55] Carnot, ibid., 527.  (The words of Prieur.)

[56] "La Nouvelle Minerve," I., 355, (Notes by Billaud-Varennes,
indited at St.  Domingo and copied by Dr.  Chervin.) "We came to a
decision only after being wearied out by the nightly meetings of our
Committee."

[57] Decree of September 17, 1793, on "Suspects." Ordinance of the
Paris Commune, October 10, 1793, extending it so as to include "those
who, having done nothing against the Revolution, do nothing for it." -
Cf.  "Papers seized in Robespierre's apartments," II., 370, letter of
Payan.  "Every man who has not been for the Revolution has been
against it, for he has done nothing for the country.  .  .  .  In
popular commissions, individual humanity, the moderation which assumes
the veil of justice, is criminal."

[58] Mortimer-Ternaux, VIII., 394, and following pages; 414 and
following pages, (on the successive members of the two Committees).

[59] Wallon, "Histoire du Tribunal Révolutionaire," III., 129-131.
Hérault de Sechelles, allied with Danton, and accused of being
indulgent, had just given guarantees, however, and applied the
revolutionary regime in Alsace with a severity worthy of Billaud.
(Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  V., 141.) "Instructions for
civil commissioners by Hérault, representative of the people,"
(Colmar, Frimaire 2, year II.,) with suggestions as to the categories
of persons that are to be "sought for, arrested and immediately put in
jail," probably embracing nineteen-twentieths of the inhabitants.

[60] Dauban, "Paris en 1794, 285, and following pages.  (Police
Reports, Germinal, year II.) Arrest of Hébert and associates "Nothing
was talked about the whole morning but the atrocious crimes of the
conspirators.  They were regarded as a thousand times more criminal
than Capet and his wife.  They ought to be punished a thousand times
over.  .  .  .  The popular hatred of Hébert is at its height .  .  .
.  The people cannot forgive Hébert for having deceived them.  .  .  .
Popular rejoicings were universal on seeing the conspirators led to
the scaffold."

[61] Moniteur, XXIV., 53.  (Session of Germinal 2, year III.) Words of
Prieur de la Côte-d'Or: "The first quarrel that occurred in the
Committee was between Saint-Just and Carnot; the latter says to the
former, 'I see that you and Robespierre are after a dictatorship.'" -
Ibid., 74.  Levasseur makes a similar statement.-Ibid., 570.  (Session
of Germinal 2, year III., words of Carnot): "I had a right to call
Robespierre a tyrant every time I spoke to him.  I did the same with
Saint-Just and Couthon."

[62] Carnot, I., 525.  (Testimony of Prieur.) Ibid., 522.  Saint-Just
says to Carnot: "You are in league with the enemies of the patriots.
It is well for you to know that a few lines from me could send you to
the guillotine in two days."

[63] Buchez et Roux, XXX., 185.  (Reply of Billaud, Collot, Vadier and
Barère to the renewed charges against them by Lecointre.) - Moniteur,
XXIV., 84.  (Session of Germinal 7, year III.) Words of Barère: "On
the 4th of Thermidor, in the Committee, Robespierre speaks like a man
who had orders to give and victims to point out." - " And you,
Barère," he replies, "remember the report you made on the2nd of
Thermidor,"

[64] Heraclitus ( c.  540-480 BC) pre-Socratic philosopher, who
believed in a cosmic justice where sinners would be punished and
haunted by the Erinyes, (the furies) the handmaids of justice.  (SR).

[65] Saint-Just, report on the Girondists, July 8, 1793; on the
necessity of imprisoning persons inimical to the Revolution, Feb.26,
1794; on the Hébertists, March 13; on the arrest of Herault-Séchelles
and Simond, March 17; on the arrest of Danton and associates March 31;
on a general policy, April 15.  - Cf., likewise, his report on
declaring the government revolutionary until peace is declared, Oct.
10, 1793, and his report of the 9th of Thermidor, year II.

[66] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 346.  (Report of March 13, 1794.) -
XXXII., 314.  (Report of April 15.)

[67] See "The Revolution," II., 313.

[68] A single phrase often suffices to give the measure of a man's
intellect and character.  The following by Saint-Just has this merit.
(Apropos of Louis XVI.  who, refraining from defending himself, left
the Tuileries and took refuge in the Assembly on the 10th of August.)
"He came amongst you; he forced his way here.  .  .  .  He resorted to
the bosom of the legislature; his soldiers burst into the asylum.  .
.  .  He made his way, so to say, by sword thrusts into the bowels of
his country that he might find a place of concealment."

[69] Particularly in the long report on Danton containing a historic
survey of the factions, (Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 76,) and the report
on the general police, (Ibid., 304,) with another historic document of
the same order.  "Brissot and Ronsin (were) recognized royalists.  .
.  .  Since Necker a system of famine has been devised.  .  .  .
Necker had a hand in the Orleans faction.  .  .  .  Double
representation (of the Third Estate) was proposed for it." Among other
charges made against Danton; after the fusillade on the Champ de Mars
in July, 1791 "You went to pass happy days at Arcis-sur-Aube, if it is
possible for a conspirator against his country to be happy.  .  .  .
When you knew that the tyrant's fall was prepared and inevitable you
returned to Paris on the 9th of August.  You wanted to go to bed on
that evil night.  .  .  .  Hatred, you said, is insupportable to me
and (yet) you said to us 'I do not like Marat,' etc." There is an
apostrophe of nine consecutive pages against Danton, who is absent.

[70] Buchez et Roux, Ibid., 312.  "Liberty emanated from the bosom of
tempests; its origin dates with that of the world issuing out of chaos
along with man, who is born dissolved in tears." (Applause.) - Ibid.,
308.  Cf.  his portrait, got up for effect, of the "revolutionary who
is "a treasure of good sense and probity."

[71] Ibid., 312.  "Liberty is not the chicanery of a palace; it is
rigidity towards evil."

[72] Barère, " Mémoires," I.  347.  "Saint-Just .  .  .  discussed
like a vizier."

[73] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 314.  "Are the lessons furnished by
history, the examples afforded by all great men, lost to the universe?
These all counsel us to lead obscure lives; the lowly cot and virtue
form the grandeurs of this world.  Let us seek our habitations on the
banks of streams, rock the cradles of our children and educate them in
Disinterestedness and Intrepidity." - As to his political or economic
capacity and general ideas, read his speeches and his "Institutions,"
(Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 133; XXX., 305, XXXV., 369,) a mass of
chemical and abstract rant.

[74] Carnot, I., 527.  (Narrated by Prieur.) "Often when hurriedly
eating a bit of dry bread at the Committee table, Barère with a jest,
brought a smile on our lips."

[75] Veron, II., 14.-Arnault, II., 74.  - Cf., passim, "Mémoires de
Barère," and the essay on Barère by Macaulay.

[76] Vilate, Barère Edition, 184, 186, 244.  " Fickle, frank,
affectionate, fond of society, especially that of women, in quest of
luxuries and knowing how to spend money." - Carnot, II.  511.  In
Prieur's eyes, Barère was simply "a good fellow."

[77] Moniteur, XXI., 173.  (Justification of Joseph Lebon and "his
somewhat harsh ways.") "The Revolution is to be spoken of with
respect, and revolutionary measures with due regard.  Liberty is a
virgin, to raise whose veil is a crime." - And again: "The tree of
Liberty grows when watered with the blood of tyrants."

[78] Moniteur, XX., 580, 582, 583, 587.  - "Campagnes de la Révolution
Française dans les Pyrénées-Orientales," by Fervel, II., 36 and
following pages.  - General Dugommier, after the capture of Toulouse,
spared the English general O'Hara, taken prisoner in spite of the
orders of the Convention.  and received the following letter from the
committee of Public Safety.  "The Committee accepts your victory and
your wound as compensations." On the 24th of December, Dugommier, that
he may not be present at the Toulon massacres, asks to return to the
convention and is ordered off to the army of the eastern Pyrenees.  -
In 1797, there were thirty thousand French prisoners in England.

[79] Moniteur, XVIII., 291.  (Speech by Barère, session of Brumaire 8,
year II.) At this rate, there are one hundred and forty deputies on
mission to the armies and in the departments.  - Before the
institution of the Committee of Public Safety, (April 7, 1793) there
were one hundred and sixty representatives in the departments, sent
there to hasten the levy of two hundred thousand men.  (Moniteur,
XVII., 99, speech by Cambon, July 11, 1793.) The Committee gradually
recalled most of these representatives and, on the 16th July, only
sixty-three were on mission.  - (Ibid., XVII., 152, speech by Gossuin,
July 16.) - On the 9th of Nivôse, the committee designated fifty-eight
representatives to establish the revolutionary government in certain
places and fixing the limits of their jurisdictions.  (Archives
Nationales, AF., II., 22.) Subsequently, several were recalled, and
replaced by others.  - The letters and orders of the representatives
on mission are filed in the National Archives according to
departments, in two series, one of which comprises missions previous
to Thermidor 9, and the other missions after that date.

[80] Thibaudeau, "Histoire du Terrorisme dans le department de la
Vienne," p.4.  "Paris, Brumaire 15, the sans-culotte Piorry,
representative of the people to the sans-culottes composing the
popular club of Poitiers."

[81] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 116.  (Letter of Laplanche,
Orleans, September 10, 1793.  - "Also procès-verbaux of the Orleans
sections, September 7.) "I organized them, after selecting them from
the popular club, into a revolutionary committee.  They worked under
my own eye, their bureau being in an adjoining chamber.  .  .  I
required sure, local information, which I could not have had without
collaborators of the country.  .  .  .  The result is that I have
arrested this night more than sixty aristocrats, strangers or
'suspects.' - "De Martel, "Études sur Fouche," 84.  Letter of
Chaumette, who posted Fouché concerning the Nevers Jacobins.
"Surrounded by royalists, federalists and fanatics, representative
Fouché had only 3 or 4 persecuted patriots to advise him."

[82] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 88.  Speech by Rousselin, Frimaire
9 - Ibid., F.7, 4421.  Speech and orders issued by Rousselin, Brumaire
25.  - Cf..  Albert Babeau, "Histoire de Troyes pendant la
Revolution," vol.  II.  Missions of Gamier de Rousselin and Bô.

[83] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 145.  (Order of Maignet, Avignon,
Floreal 13, year II., and proclamation of Floréal 14.) - Ibid., AF.,
II., 111, Grenoble.  Prairial 8, year II.  Similar orders issued by
Albitte and Laporte, for renewing all the authorities of Grenoble.  -
Ibid, AF., II., 135.  Similar order of Ricord at Grasse, Pluviôse 28,
and throughout the Var.  - Ibid., AF., II., 36.  Brumaire, year II.,
circular of the Committee of Public Safety to the representatives on
mission in the departments: "Before quitting your post, you are to
effect the most complete purification of the constituted authorities
and public functionaries."

[84] Decrees of Frimaire 6 and 14, year II.

[85] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 22.  Acts of the committee of
Public Safety, Nivôse 9, year II.

[86] Ibid., AF., II., 37.  Letter to the Committee on the War, signed
by Barère and Billaud-Varennes, Pluviôse 23,, year II.

[87] Ibid., AF., II., 36.  Letter of the Committee of Public Safety to
Le Carpentier, on mission in l'Orne, Brumaire 19, year II.  "The
administrative bodies of Alençon, the district excepted, are wholly
gangrened; all are Feuillants, or infected with a no less pernicious
spirit.  .  .  .  For the choice of subjects, and the incarceration of
individuals, you can refer to the sans-culottes: the most nervous are
Symaroli and Préval.  - At Montagne, the administration must be wholly
removed, as well as the collector of the district, and the post-
master; .  .  .  purify the popular club, expel nobles and limbs of
the law, those that have been turned out of office, priests,
muscadins, etc.  .  .  .  Dissolve two companies, one the grenadiers
and the other the infantry who are very muscadin and too fond of
processions.  .  .  .  Re-form the staff and officers of the National
Guard.  To secure more prompt and surer execution of these measures of
security you may refer to the present municipality, the Committee of
Surveillance and the Cannoneers.

[88] Ibid., AF.,II., 37.  To Ricord, on mission at Marseilles,
Pluviôse 7, year II, a strong and rude admonition: he is going soft,
he has gone to live with Saint-Même, a suspect; he is too biased in
favor of the Marseilles people who, during the siege "made sacrifices
to procure subsistences;" he blamed their arrest, etc.  - Floréal 13,
year II., to Bouret on mission in the Manche and at Calvados.  "The
Committee are under the impression that you are constantly deceived by
an insidious secretary who, by the bad information he has given you,
has often led you to give favorable terms to the aristocracy, etc." -
Ventôse 6, year II., to Guimberteau, on mission near the army on the
coasts of Cherbourg: "The committee is astonished to find that the
military commission established by you, undoubtedly for striking off
the heads of conspirators, was the first to let them off.  Are you not
acquainted with the men who compose it? For what have you chosen them?
If you do not know them, how does it happen that you have summoned
them for such duties? " - Ibid., and Ventôse 23, order to Guimberteau
to investigate the conduct of his secretary

[89] See especially in the "Archives des Affaires étrangères," vols.
324 to 334, the correspondence of secret agents sent into the
interior.

[90] Archives Nationales, AF.,II., 37, to Fromcastel on mission in
Indre-et-Loire, Floréal 13, year II.  "The Committee sends you a
letter from the people's club of Chinon, demanding the purging and
organization of all the constituted authorities of this district.  The
committee requests you to proceed at once to carry out this important
measure."

[91] Words of Robespierre, session of the convention September 24,
1793.  - On another representative, Merlin de Thionville, who likewise
stood fire, Robespierre wrote as follows: "Merlin de Thionville,
famous for surrendering Mayence, and more than suspected of having
received his reward."

[92] Guillon, II., 207.  - "Fouché," by M. de Martel, 292.

[93] Hamel, III., 395, and following pages.  - Buchez et Roux, XXX.,
435.  (Session of the Jacobin club, Nivôse 12, year II.  Speech of
Collot d'Herbois.) "To-day I no longer recognize public opinion; had I
reached Paris three days later, I should probably have been indicted."

[94] Marcelin Boudet, "Les conventionnels d'Auvergne," 438.
(Unpublished memoir ot Maignet.)

[95] Buchez et Roux, XXXIV., 165, 191.  (Evidence of witnesses on the
trial of Carrier.) - Paris, II., 113, "Histoire de Joseph Lebon." "The
prisons," says Le Bon, "overflowed at Saint-Pol.  I was there and
released two hundred persons.  Well, in spite of my orders, several
were put back by the committee of Surveillance, authorised by Lebas, a
friend of Darthé.  What could I do against Darthé supported by Saint-
Just and Lebas? He would have denounced me." - Ibid., 128, apropos of
a certain Lefèvre, "veteran of the Revolution," arrested and brought
before the revolutionary tribunal by order of Lebon.  "It was
necessary to take the choice of condemning him, or of being denounced
and persecuted myself, without saving him." - Beaulieu, "Essai," V.,
233.  "I am afraid and I cause fear was the principle of all the
revolutionary atrocities."

[96] Ludovic Sciout, "Histoire de la Constitution civile du Clergé,
IV., 136.  (Orders of Pinét and Cavaignac, Pluviôse 22, and Ventôse
2.) - Moniteur, XXIV., 469.  (Session of Prairial 30, year III.,
denunciation of representative Laplanche at the bar of the house, by
Boismartin.) On the 24th of Brumaire, year II., Laplanche and General
Seepher installed themselves at St.  Lô in the house of an old man of
seventy, a M. Lemonnier then under arrest.  "Scarcely had they
entered the house when they demanded provisions of every kind, linen,
clothes, furniture, jewelry, plate, vehicles and title-deeds - all
disappeared." Whilst the inhabitants of St.  Lô were living on a few
ounces of brown bread, "the best bread, the choicest wines, pillaged
in the house of Lemonnier, were lavishly given in pans and kettles to
General Seepher's horses, also to those of representative Laplanche."
Lemonnier, set at liberty, could not return to his emptied dwelling
then transformed into a storehouse.  He lived at the inn, stripped of
all his possessions, valued at sixty thousand livres, having saved
from his effects only one silver table-service, which he had taken
with him into prison.

[97] Marcelin Boudet, 446.  (Notes of M. Ignace de Barante.) Also
440.  (Unpublished memoir of Maignet).

[98] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 59.  Extract from the minutes of
the meetings of the People's club of Metz, and depositions made before
the committee of Surveillance of the club, Floreal 12, year II., on
the conduct of representative Duquesnoy, arrived at Metz the evening
before at six o'clock.  - There are thirty-two depositions, and among
others those of M. Altmayer, Joly and Clédat.  One of the witnesses
states: "As to these matters, I regarded this citizen (Duquesnoy) as
tipsy or drunk, or as a man beside himself." - This is customary with
Duquesnoy.  - Cf.  Paris, "His.  de Joseph Lebon," I., 273, 370.-
"Archives des Affaires étrangères," vol.  329.  Letter of Gadolle,
September 11, 1793.  "I saw Duquesnoy, the deputy, dead drunk at
Bergues, on Whit-Monday, at11 o'clock in the evening." - "Un Séjour en
France, 1792 to 1796, p.  136.  "His naturally savage temper is
excited to madness by the abuse of strong drink.  General de
.....assures us that he saw him seize the mayor of Avesnes, a
respectable old man, by the hair on his presenting him with a petition
relating to the town, and throw him down with the air of a cannibal."
"He and his brother were dealers in hops at retail, at Saint Pol.  He
made this brother a general."

[99] Alexandrine des Echerolles, "Une famile noble sous la Terreur,"
209.  At Lyons, Marin, the commissioner, "a tall, powerful, robust man
with stentorian lungs," opens his court with a volley of "republican
oaths.  .  .  "  .  .  The crowd of supplicants melts away.  One lady
alone dared present her petition.  "Who are you?" She gives her name.
"What! You have the audacity to mention a traitor's name in this
place?" Get away and, giving her a push, he put her outside the door
with a kick.

[100] Ibid.  A mass of evidence proves, on the contrary, that people
of every class gave their assistance, owing to which the fire was
almost immediately extinguished.

[101] Ibid.  The popular club unanimously attests these facts, and
despatches six delegates to enter a protest at the convention.  Up to
the 9th of Thermidor, no relief is granted, while the tax imposed by
Duquesnoy is collected.  On the 5th Fructidor, year II., the order of
Duquesnoy is cancelled by the committee of Public Safety, but the
money is not paid back.

[102] Paris, I., 370.  (Words of Duquesnoy to Lebon.)

[103] Carnot, "Mémoires," I., 414.  (Letter of Duquesnoy to the
central bureau of representatives at Arras.) The import of these
untranslatable profanities being sufficiently clear I let them stand
as in the original.-Tr.

[104] "Un Sejour en France," 158, 171.  - Manuscript journal of Mallet
du Pan (January, 1795).- Cf.  his letters to the convention, the jokes
of jailors and sbirri, for instance.  - (Moniteur, XVIII., 214,
Brumaire I, year II.) - Lacretelle, "Dix Années d'Epreuves," 178.  "He
ordered that everybody should dance in his fief of Picardy.  They
danced even in prison.  Whoever did not dance was "suspect." He
insisted on a rigid observance of the fêtes in honor of Reason, and
that everybody should visit the temple of the Goddess each decadi,
which was the cathedral (at Noyon).  Ladies, bourgeoises,
seamstresses, and cooks, were required to form what was called the
chain of Equality.  We dragoons were forced to be performers in this
strange ballet."

[105] De Martel, "Fouché," 418.  (Orders of Albitte and Collot, Nivôse
13, year II.)

[106] Camille Boursier, " Essai sur la Terreur en Anjou," 225.  Letter
of Vacheron, Frimaire 15, year II.) "Republiquain, it is absolutely
necessary, immediately, that you have sent or brought into the house
of the representatives, a lot of red wine, of which the consumption is
greater than ever.  People have a right to drink to the Republic when
they have helped to preserve the commune you and yours live in.  I
hold you responsible for my demand." Signed, le republiquain,
Vacheron."

[107] Ibid., 210.  Deposition of Madame Edin, apropos of Quesnoy, a
prostitute, aged twenty-six, Brumaire 12, year III.; and of Rose,
another prostitute.  Similar depositions by Benaben and Scotty.

[108] Dauban, "La Demagogie en 1793," p.369.  (Extracts from the
unpublished memoirs of Mercier de Rocher.) - Ibid., 370.  "Bourdon de
l'Oise had lived with Tuncq at Chantonney, where they kept busy
emptying bottles of fine wine.  Bourdon is an excellent patriot, a man
of sensibility, but, in his fits of intoxication, he gives himself up
to impracticable views.   "Let those rascally administrators," he
says, "be arrested!" Then, going to the window, - he heard a runaway
horse galloping in the street- "That's another anti-revolutionary! Let
'em all be arrested!" - Cf.  "Souvenirs," by General Pélleport, p.21.
At Perpignan, he attended the fête of Reason.  "The General in command
of the post made an impudent speech, even to the most repulsive
cynicisim.  Some prostitutes, well known to this wretch, filled one of
the tribunes; they waved their handkerchiefs and shouted " Vive la
Raison! " After listening to similar harangues by representatives
Soubrang and Michaud, Pélleport, although half cured (of his wound)
returns to camp: "I could not breathe freely in town, and did not
think that I was safe until facing the enemy along with my comrades."

[109] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.332; correspondence of
secret agents, October, 1793.  "Citizen Cusset, representative of the
people, shows no dignity in his mission; he drinks like a Lapithe, and
when intoxicated commits the arbitrary acts of a vizier." For the
style and orthography of Cusset, see one of his letters.  (Dauban,
"Paris en 1794," p 14.) - Berryat St.  Prix, "La Justice
Révolutionnaire," (2nd ed.) 339.

[110] Ibid., 371.  (According to "Piecès et Documents" published by M.
Fajon.) - Moniteur, XXIV., 453.  (Session of Floréal 24, year III.)
Address of the commune of Saint-Jean du Gard.  - XXI., 528.  (Session
of Fructidor 2, year III.) Address of the Popular club of Nîmes.

[111] Moniteur, XXIV., 602.  (Session of Prairial 13, year III.) Report
of Durand Meillan: "This denunciation is only too well supported by
documents.  It is for the convention to say whether it will hear them
read.  I have to state beforehand that it can hear nothing more
repulsive nor better authenticated."- De Martel, "Fouché, 246.
(Report of the constituted authorities of la Nièvre on the missions of
Collot d'Herbois, Laplanche, Fouché and Pointe, Prairial 19, year
III.) Laplanche, a former Benedictine, is the most foul-mouthed." In
his speech to the people of Moulins-Engelbert, St.  Pierre-le-Montier,
and Nevers, Laplanche asked girls to surrender themselves and let
modesty go.  "Beget children," he exclaims, "the Republic needs them.
continence is the virtue of fools." Bibliotheque Nationale, Lb.  41,
No.  1802.  (Denunciation, by the six sections of the Dijon commune to
the convention, of Leonard Bourdon and Piochefer Bernard de Saintes,
during their mission in Côte-d'Or.) Details on the orgies of Bernard
with the municipality, and on the drunkenness and debaucheries of
Bourdon with the riff-raff~ of the country; authentic documents
proving the robberies and assassinations committed by Bernard.  He
pillaged the house of M. Micault, and, in four hours, had this person
arrested, tried and guillotined; he attended the execution himself,
and that evening, in the dead man's house, danced and sang before his
daughter with his acolytes.

[112] "Souvenirs," by General Pélleport, p.8.  He, with his battalion,
is inspected in the Place du Capitale, at Toulouse, by the
representative on mission.  "It seems as if I can still see that
charlatan: He shook his ugly plumed head and dragged along his saber
like a merry soldier, wishing to appear brave.  It made me feel sad."

[113] Fervel, "Campagnes des Français dans les Pyrenees Orientals,"
I., 169.  (October, 1793.) - Ibid., 201, 206.  - Cf.  188.  Plan of
Fabre for seizing Roses and Figuières, with eight thousand men,
without provisions or transports.  "Fortune is on the side of fools,"
he said.  Naturally the scheme fails.  Collioure is lost, and
disasters accumulate.  As an offset to this the worthy general
Dagobert is removed.  Commandant Delatre and chief-of-staff Ramel are
guillotined.  In the face of the impracticable orders of the
representatives the commandant of artillery commits suicide.  On the
devotion of the officers and enthusiasm of the troops, Ibid., 105,
106, 130, 131, 162.

[114] Sybel (Dosquet's translation [French]), II., 435; III., 132,
140.  (For details and authorities, cf.  the Memoirs of Marshal
Soult.)

[115] Gouvion St.  Cyr, "Mémoires sur les campagnes de 1792 à la paix
de Campio-Formio," I., pp.91 to 139.  - Ibid., 229.  "The effect of
this was to lead men who had any means to keep aloof from any sort of
promotion." - Cf., ibid., II., 131 (November, 1794,) the same order of
things still kept up.  By order of the representatives the army
encamps during the winter in sheds on the left bank of the Rhine, near
Mayence, a useless proceeding and mere literary parade.  "They would
listen to no reason; a fine army and well-mounted artillery were to
perish with cold and hunger, for no object whatever, in quarters that
might have been avoided." The details are heart-rending.  Never was
military heroism so sacrificed to the folly of civilian commanders.

[116] See Paris, "Histoire de Joseph Lebon," I., ch.  I, for
biographical details and traits of character.

[117] Ibid., I., 13.  - His mother became crazy and was put in an
asylum.  Her derangement, he says, was due to "her indignation at his
oath of allegiance (to the Republic) and at his appointment to the
curacy of Nouvelle-Vitasse."

[118] Ibid., I., 123.  Speech by Lebon in the church of Beaurains.

[119] Ibid., II., 71, 72.  - Cf.  85.  "Citizen Chamonart, wine-
dealer, standing at the entrance of his cellar, sees the
representative pass, looks at him and does not salute him.  Lebon
steps up to him, arrests him, treats him as an "agent of Pitt and
Cobourg.".  .  .  ." They search him, take his pocket-book and lead
him off to the Anglaises (a prison").

[120] Ibid., II., 84.

[121] Moniteur, XXV., 201.  (Session of Messidor 22, year III.) "When
in the tribune (of the Convention) prison conspiracies were announced.
.  .  .  my dreams were wholly of prison conspiracies."

[122] Ibid., 211.  (Explanations given by Lebon to the Convention.) -
Paris, II., 350, 351.  (Verdict of the jury.)

[123] Paris, II., 85.

[124] Buchez et Roux, XXXIV., 181.  (Depositions of Monneron, a
merchant.)

[125] Ibid., 184.  (Deposition of Chaux.) - Cf.  200.  (Depositions of
Monneron and Villemain, merchants.)

[126] Ibid., 204.  (Deposition of Lamarie, administrator of the
department.)

[127] Ibid., 173.  (Deposition of Erard, a copyist.) - 168.
(Deposition of Thomas, health officer.) "To all his questions, Carrier
replied in the grossest language."

[128] Ibid., 203.  (Deposition of Bonami, merchant.)

[129] Ibid., 156.  (Deposition of Vaujois, public prosecutor to the
military commission.)

[130] Ibid., 169.  (Deposition of Thomas.) - Berryat Saint-Prix, pp.
34, 35..  - Buchez et Roux, 118.  "He received the members of the
popular club with blows, also the municipal officers with saber
thrusts, who came to demand supplies".  .  .  ." He draws his saber
(against the boatman) and strikes at him, which he avoids only by
running away."

[131] Buchez et Roux, XXXIV., 196.  (Deposition of Julien.) "Carrier
said to me in a passion: "It is you, is it, you damned beggar, who
presumes to denounce me to the Committee of Public Safety.  .  .  .
As it is sometimes necessary for the public interests to get rid of
certain folks quickly, I won't take the trouble to send you to the
guillotine, I'll be your executioner myself!"

[132] Ibid., 175.  (Deposition of Tronjolly.) 295.  (Depositions of
Jean Lavigne, a shopkeeper; of Arnandan, civil commissioner; also of
Corneret, merchant.) 179.  (Deposition of Villemain).  - Berryat
Saint-Prix, 34.  "Carrier, says the gendarme Desquer, who carried his
letters, was a roaring lion rather than an officer of the people." "He
looked at once like a charlatan and a tiger," says another witness.

[133] Ibid., XXXIV., 204.  (Deposition of Lamarie.)

[134] Ibid., 183.  (Deposition of Caux.)

[135] Mallet-Dupan, Mémoires," II., 6.  (Memorial of Feb.  I, 1794.)
On André Dumont, "Un Séjour en France," 158, 171.  - On Merlin de
Thionville, Michelet, VI., 97.

[136] De Martel, "Fouché" 100.

[137] Mallet-Dupan, II., 46.

[138] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 413, 423.  (Letter of Julien to
Robespierre.)

[139] Archives Nationales, AF., II., III.  An order issued by
Bourbotte, Tours, Messidor 5, year II., "requiring the district
administration to furnish him personally, as well as for the citizens
attached to his commission, forty bottles of red wine and thirty of
white wine, to be taken from the cellars of emigrés, or from those of
persons condemned to death; and, besides this, fifty bottles of common
wine other than white or red." - On the 2nd of Messidor, ale is drunk
and there is a fresh order for fifty bottles of red wine, fifty of
common wine, and two bottles of brandy.  - De Martel, " Fouché," 419,
420.  - Moniteur, XXIV., 604.  (Session of Prairial 13, par III.)
"Dugué reads the list of charges brought against Mallarmé.  He is
accused .  .  .  .  of having put in requisition whatever pleased him
for his table and for other wants, without paying for anything, not
even for the post-horses and postillions that carried him." - Ibid.
602.  Report of Perès du Gers.  "He accuses Dartigoyte .  .  .  of
having taken part with his secretaries in the auction of the furniture
of Daspe, who had been condemned; of having kept the most valuable
pieces for himself, and afterwards fixing their price; of having
warned those who had charge of the sale that confinement awaited
whoever should bid on the articles he destined for himself." -
Laplanche, ex-Benedictine, said in his mission in Loiret, that "those
who did not like the Revolution must pay those who make it."

[140] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 426.  (Extract from the Memoirs of
Sénart.) - Hamel, III., 565.  (Description of Teresa's domicile by the
Marquis de Paroy, a petitioner and eye-witness.)

[141] The reader might read about Tallien in the book written by
Thérèse Chatrles-Vallin: "Tallien," "Le mal-aimé de la Révolution",
Ed.  Jean Picollec, Paris 1997.  (SR).

[142] Buchez et Roux, XXXIII., 12.  (Extract from the Memoirs of
Sénart.) "The certified copies of these drafts are on file with the
committee of General Security."

[143] Report of Courtois, 360.  (Letters of Julien to Robespierre,
Pluviôse 15 and 16, year II.) - Buchez et Roux, XXXIV., 199, 200, 202,
203, 211.  (Depositions of Villemain, Monneron, Legros, Robin.) -
Berryat Saint-Prix, 35.  (Depositions of Fourrier, and of Louise
Courant, sempstress.)

[144] See, on Tallien," Mémoires de Sénart." - On Javogues, Moniteur,
XXIV., 461, Floreal 24, III.  Petition against Javogues, with several
pages of signatures, especially those of the inhabitants of
Montbrison: "In the report made by him to the Convention he puts down
coin and assignats at seven hundred and seventy-four thousand six
hundred and ninety-six francs, while the spoils of one person provided
him with five hundred thousand francs in cash." - On Fouché, De
Martel, 252.  - On Dumont, Mallet-Dupan, "Manuscript notes." (January,
1795.) On Rovère, Michelet, VI., 256.  - Carnot, II., 87.  (According
to the Memoirs of the German Olsner, who was in Paris under the
Directory:) "The tone of Barras' Salon was that of a respectable
gambling house; the house of Reubell resembled the waiting-room of an
inn at which the mail-coach stops."

[145] Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 391, and XXXIII., 9.  (Extracts from the
Memoirs of Sénart.)

[146] Carnot, "Mémoires," I.  416.  Carnot, having shown to the
Committee of Public Safety, proofs of the depredations committed on
the army of the North, Saint-Just got angry and exclaimed: "It is only
an enemy of the Republic that would accuse his colleagues of
depredations, as if patriots hadn't a right to everything!"

[147] As to Caligula see Suetonius and Philo.- With respect to Hakem,
see "L'Exposé de la Religion des Druses," by M. de Sacy.

[148] Saint-Just, speaking in the Convention, says: "What constitutes
a republic is the utter destruction of whatever is opposed to it."

[149] Orders issued by Saint-Just and Lebas for the departments of
Pas-de-Calais, Nord, la Somme et l'Aisne.  - Cf.  "Histoire de
l'Alsace," by Strbel, and "Recueil de pieces authentiques pour servir
à l'histoire de la Révolution à Strasbourg," 3 vols.-Archives
Nationales AF., II., 135, orders issued Brumaire 10, year II., and
list of the one hundred and ninety-three persons taxed.

[150] Buchez et Roux, XXXI., 32.  (Saint-Just's reply to Mayor Monet.)
- De Sybel, II., 447, 448.  At the first interview Saint-Just said to
Schneider: "Why use so much ceremony? You know the crimes of the
aristocrats? In the twenty-four hours taken for one investigation you
might have twenty-four condemned."

[151] "Journal de marche du sergent Fricasse," p.34.  (Narrative by
Marshal Soult.)

[152] Cf.  in the Bible, the story of Ahasuerus who, out of respect
for his own majesty, can-not retract the order he has issued against
the Jews, but he turns the difficulty by allowing them to defend
themselves.

[153] Mallet-Dupan, II., 47.

[154] Berryat Saint-Prix, "La Justice Revolutionnaire," XVII.-Marcelin
Boudet, "Les Conventionnels d'Auvergne," 269.  - Moniteur, Brumaire
27, year III., report by Calès.

[155] Paris, "Histoire de Joseph Lebon," I., 371; II., 341, 344.-De
Martel, "Fouché," 153.  - Berryat Saint-Prix, 347, 348.

[156] Berryat Saint-Prix, 390.  -Ibid., 404.  (On Soubrié, executioner
at Marseilles, letter of Lazare Giraud, public prosecutor): "I put him
in the dungeon for having shed tears on the scaffold, in executing the
anti-revolutionists we sent to be executed."

[157] Moniteur, XVIII., 413.  (Session of the Convention, letter of
Lequinio and Laignelot, Rochefort, Brumaire 17, year II.) "We have
appointed the patriot Anse guilloteneur and we have invited him, in
dining with us, to come and assume his prescribed powers, and water
them with a libation in honor of the Republic.  - Paris, II., 72.

[158] Marcelin Boudet, 270.  (Testimony of Bardanèche de Bayonne.)

[159] Guil1on, "Histoire de la ville de Lyons pendant la Revolution,"
II., 427, 431, 433.

[160] "Mémoire du Citoyen Fréron," (in the Barrière collection,)
p.357.  (Testimony of a survivor.)

[161] Paris, II., 32

[162] Delandine, "Tableaux des prisons de Lyons," p.14.

[163] Camille Boursier, "Essai sur la Terreur en Anjou," 164.  (Letter
of Boniface, ex-Benedictine, president of the Revolutionary committee,
to Representative Richard, Brumaire 3, year II.) "We send you the said
Henri Verdier, called de la Saurinière.  .  .  .  It will not be long
before you will see that we make the guillotine a present.  .  .  .
The Committee begs you to send him sacram sanctam guillotinam, and the
republican minister of his worship.  .  .  Not an hour of the day
passes that new members do not come to us whom we desire to initiate
in its mysteries, (sic)."

[164] Thibaudeau, "Histoire du Terrorisme dans le départment de la
Vienne," 34, 48.  - Berryat Saint-Prix, 239.

[165] Archives Nationales F.7, 4435.  (Letter of Lebon, Floréal 23,
year II.) - Paris, I.  241.

[166] Buchez et Roux, XXXIV., 184, 200.  (Depositions of Chaux,
Monneron and Villemain.)

[167] Register of the Revolutionary Tribunal of Nantes, copied by M.
Chevrier.  (M. Chevrier has kindly sent me his manuscript copy.) -
Berryat Saint-Prix, 94.  - Archives Nationales, F7.  4591.  (Extract
from the acts of the Legislative Committee, session of Floréal 3, year
III.  Restitution of the confiscated property of Alexander Long to his
son.) Dartigoyte, at Auch, did what Carrier did at Nantes.  "It
follows from the above abstract duly signed that on the 27th Germinal,
year II., between eight and nine o'clock in the evening, Alexandre
Long, Sr., was put to death on the public square of the commune of
Auch by the executioner of criminal sentences, without any judgment
having been rendered against the said Long." - In many places an
execution becomes a spectacle for the Jacobins of the town and a party
of pleasure.  For instance, at Arras, on the square devoted to
executions, a gallery was erected for spectators with a room for the
sale of refreshments, and, during the execution of M. de Montgon, the
"Ça ira" is played on the bass drum.  (Paris, II., 158, and I., 159.)
A certain facetious representative has rehearsals of the performance
in his own house.  "Lejeune, to feed his bloodthirsty imagination, had
a small guillotine put up, on which he cut off the heads of all the
poultry consumed at his table.  .  .  .  Often, in the middle of the
repast, he had it brought in and set to work for the amusement of his
guests." (Moniteur, XXIV., 607, session of June I, 1795, letter from
the district of Besançon, and with the letter, the confirmatory
document.) "This guillotine, says the reporter, is deposited with the
Committee of Legislation."


CHAPTER III.  THE RULERS.  (continued).

I.   The Central Government Administration.

The administrative body at Paris.  - Composition of the group out of
which it was recruited.  - Deterioration of this group.  - Weeding-out
of the Section Assemblies.  - Weeding out of the popular clubs.  -
Pressure of the government.

To provide these local sovereigns with the subordinate lieutenants and
agents which they require, we have the local Jacobin population, and
we have seen the composition of the recruits,[1]

* the distressed and the perverted of every class and degree,
especially the lowest,
* the castaways,
* envious and resentful subordinates,
* small shopkeepers in debt,
* the migrating, high-living workers,
* barflies,
* vagrants,
* men of the gutters,
* street-walkers,

 - in short, every species of "anti-social vermin," male and
female,[2] including a few honest crack-brains into which the
fashionable theory had freely found its way; the rest, and by far the
largest number, are veritable beasts of prey, speculating on the
established order of things and adopting the revolutionary faith only
because it provides food for their appetites.  - In Paris, they number
five or six thousand, and, after Thermidor, there is about the same
number, the same appetites rallying them around the same dogma,[3]
levelers and terrorists, "some because they are poor, others because
they have broken off the habit of working at their trade," furious
with "the scoundrels who own a coach house, against the rich and the
hoarders of objects of prime necessity." Many of them "having soiled
themselves during the Revolution, ready to do it again provided the
rich rascals, monopolists and merchants can all be killed," all
"frequenters of popular clubs who think themselves philosophers,
although most of them are unable to read," at the head of them the
remnant of the most notorious political bandits,

* the famous post-master, Drouet, who, in the tribune at the
Convention, declared himself a "brigand,"[4]
* Javogues, the robber of Montbrison and the "Nero of Ain,"
* the drunkard Casset, formerly a silk-worker and later the pasha of
Thionville,
* Bertrand, the friend of Charlier, the ex-mayor and executioner of
Lyons,
* Darthé, ex-secretary of Lebon and the executioner at Arras,
* Rossignol and nine other Septembriseurs of the Abbaye and the
Carmelites, and, finally, the great apostle of despotic communism,
* Babeuf, who, sentenced to twenty years in irons for the
falsification of public contracts, and as needy as he is vicious,
rambles about Paris airing his disappointed ambitions and empty
pockets along with the swaggering crew who, if not striving to reach
the throne by a new massacre,[5] tramp through the streets slipshod,
for lack of money "to redeem a pair of boots at the shoemakers," or to
sell some snuff-box their last resource, for a morning dram.[6]

In this class we see the governing rabble fully and distinctly.
Separated from its forced adherents and the official robots who serve
it as they would any other power, it stands out pure and unalloyed by
any neutral influx; we recognize here the permanent residue, the deep,
settled slime of the social sewer.  It is to this sink of vice and
ignorance that the revolutionary government betakes itself for its
staff-officers and its administrative bodies.

Nowhere else could they be found.  For the daily task imposed upon
them, and which must be done by them, is robbery and murder; excepting
the pure fanatics, who are few in number, only brutes and blackguards
have the aptitudes and tastes for such business.  In Paris, as in the
provinces, it is from the clubs or popular associations in which they
congregate, that they are sought for.  - Each section of Paris
contains one of these clubs, in all forty-eight, rallied around the
central club in the Rue St.  Honoré, forty-eight district alliances of
professional rioters and brawlers, the rebels and blackguards of the
social army, all the men and women incapable of devoting themselves to
a regular life and useful labor,[7] especially those who, on the 31st
of May and 2nd of June, had aided the Paris Commune and the "Mountain"
in violating the Convention.  They recognize each other by this sign
that, "each would be hung in case of a counter-revolution,"[8] laying
it down "as an incontestable fact that, should a single aristocrat be
spared, all of them would mount the scaffold."[9] They are naturally
wary and they stick together: in their clique "everything is done on
the basis of good fellowship;"[10] no one is admitted except on the
condition of having proved his qualifications "on the 10th of August
and 31st of May."[11]  And, as they have made their way into the
Commune and into the revolutionary committees behind victorious
leaders, they are able, through the certificates of civism which these
arbitrarily grant or refuse, to exclude, not only from political life
but, again, from civil life, whoever is not of their party.

"See," writes one of Danton's correspondents,[12] "the sort of persons
who easily obtain these certificates, - the Ronsins, the Jourdans, the
Maillards, the Vincents, all bankrupts, keepers of gambling-hells and
cut-throats.  Ask these individuals whether they have paid the
patriotic contribution, whether they regularly pay the usual taxes,
whether they give to the poor of their sections, to the volunteer
soldiers, etc.; whether they mount guard or see it regularly done,
whether they have made a loyal declaration for the forced loan.  You
will find that they have not.  .  .  .  The Commune issues
certificates of civism to its satellites and refuses them to the best
citizens."

The monopoly is obvious; they make no attempt to conceal it; six weeks
later,[13] it becomes official: several revolutionary committees
decide not to grant certificates of civism to citizens who are not
members of a popular club."  And strict exclusion goes on increasing
from month to month.  Old certificates are canceled and new ones
imposed, which new certificates have new formalities added to them, a
larger number of endorsers being required and certain kinds of
guarantees being rejected; there is greater strictness in relation to
the requisite securities and qualifications; the candidate is put off
until fuller information can be obtained about him; he is rejected at
the slightest suspicion:[14] he is only too fortunate if he is
tolerated in the Republic as a passive subject, if he is content to be
taxed and taxed when they please, and if he is not sent to join the
"suspects" in prison; whoever does not belong to the band does not
belong to the community.

Amongst themselves and in their popular club it is worse, for

 "the eagerness to get any office leads to every one denouncing each
other; "[15]

consequently, at the Jacobin club in the rue St.  Honoré, and in the
branch clubs of the quarter, there is constant purging, and always in
the same sense, until the faction is cleansed of all honest or
passable alloy and only a minority remains, which has its own way at
every balloting.  One of them announces that, in his club, eighty
doubtful members have already been gotten rid of; another that, in his
club, one hundred are going to be excluded.[16]  On Ventose 23, in the
"Bon-Consei1" club, most of the members examined are rejected: "they
are so strict that a man who cannot show that he acted energetically
in critical times, cannot form part of the assembly; he is set aside
for a mere trifle." On Ventôse 13, in the same club, "out of twenty-
six examined, seven only are admitted; one citizen, a tobacco dealer,
aged sixty-eight, who has always performed his duty, is rejected for
having called the president Monsieur, and for having spoken in the
tribune bareheaded; two members, after this, insisted on his being a
Moderate, which is enough to keep him out." Those who remain, consist
of the most restless and most loquacious, the most eager for office,
the self-mutilated club being thus reduced to a nucleus of charlatans
and scoundrels.

To these spontaneous eliminations through which the club deteriorates,
add the constant pressure through which the Committee of Public Safety
frightens and degrades it.  The lower the revolutionary government
sinks, and the more it concentrates its power, the more servile and
sanguinary do its agents and employees become.  It strikes right and
left as a warning; it imprisons or decapitates the turbulent among its
own clients, the secondary demagogues who are impatient at not being
principal demagogues, the bold who think of striking a fresh blow in
the streets, Jacques Roux, Vincent, Momoro, Hébert, leaders of the
Cordeliers club and of the Commune.  After these, the indulgent who
are disposed to exercise some discernment or moderation in terrorism,
Camille Desmoulins, Danton and their adherents; and lastly, many
others who are more or less doubtful, compromised or compromising,
wearied or eccentric, from Maillard to Chaumette, from Antonelle to
Chabot, from Westermann to Clootz.   Each of the proscribed has a gang
of followers, and suddenly the whole gang are obliged to do a volte-
face; those who were able to show initiative, grovel, while those who
could show mercy, become hardened.  Henceforth, amongst the subaltern
Jacobins, the roots of independence, humanity, and loyalty, hard to
extirpate even in an ignoble and cruel nature, are eradicated even to
the last fiber, the revolutionary staff, already so debased, becoming
more and more degraded, until it is worthy of the office assigned to
it.  The confidants of Hébert, those who listen to Chaumette, the
comrades of Westermann, the officers of Ronsin, the faithful readers
of Camille, the admirers and devotees of Danton, all are bound to
publicly repudiate their incarcerated friend or leader and approve of
the decree which sends him to the scaffold, to applaud his
calumniators, to overwhelm him on trial: this or that judge or
juryman, who is one of Danton's partisans, is obliged to stifle a
defense of him, and, knowing him to be innocent, pronounce him guilty;
one who had often dined with Desmoulins is not only to guillotine him,
but, in addition to this, to guillotine his young widow.  Moreover, in
the revolutionary committees, at the Commune, in the offices of the
Committee of General Safety, in the bureau of the Central Police, at
the headquarters of the armed force, at the revolutionary Tribunal,
the service to which they are compelled to do becomes daily more
onerous and more repulsive.  To denounce neighbors, to arrest
colleagues, to go and seize innocent persons, known to be such, in
their beds, to select in the prisons the thirty or forty unfortunates
who form the daily food of the guillotine, to "amalgamate" them
haphazard, to try them and condemn them in a lot, to escort
octogenarian women and girls of sixteen to the scaffold, even under
the knife-blade, to see heads dropping and bodies swinging, to
contrive means for getting rid of a multitude of corpses, and for
removing the too-visible stains of blood.  Of what species do the
beings consist, who can accept such a task, and perform it day after
day, with the prospect of doing it indefinitely? Fouquier-Tinville
himself succumbs.  One evening, on his way to the Committee of Public
Safety, "he feels unwell" on the Pont-Neuf and exclaims: "I think I
see the ghosts of the dead following us, especially those of the
patriots I have had guillotined!"[17] And at another time: "I would
rather plow the ground than be public prosecutor.  If I could, I would
resign." -- The government, as the system becomes aggravated, is
forced to descend lower still that it may find suitable instruments;
it finds them now only in the lowest depths: in Germinal, to renew the
Commune, in Floréal, to renew the ministries, in Prairial, to re-
compose the revolutionary Tribunal, month after month, purging and re-
constituting the committees of each quarter[18] of the city.  In vain
does Robespierre, writing and re-writing his secret lists, try to find
men able to maintain the system; he always falls back on the same
names, those of unknown persons, illiterate, about a hundred knaves or
fools with four or five second-class despots or fanatics among them,
as malevolent and as narrow as himself.  - The purifying crucible has
been used too often and for too long a time; it has overheated; what
was sound, or nearly so, in the elements of the primitive fluid has
been forcibly evaporated; the rest has fermented and become acid;
nothing remains in the bottom of the vessel but the lees of stupidity
and wickedness, their concentrated and corrosive dregs.

II.  Subaltern Jacobins.

Quality of subaltern leaders.  - How they rule in the section
assemblies.  - How they seize and hold office.

Such are the subordinate sovereigns[19] who in Paris, during 14 months
dispose as they please, of fortunes, liberties and lives.  - And
first, in the section assemblies, which still maintain a semblance of
popular sovereignty, they rule despotically and uncontested.  -

"A dozen or fifteen men wearing a red cap,[20] well-informed or not,
claim the exclusive right of speaking and acting, and if any other
citizen with honest motives happens to propose measures which he
thinks proper, and which really are so, no attention is paid to these
measures, or, if it is, it is only to show the members composing the
assemblage of how little account they are.  These measures are
accordingly rejected, solely because they are not presented by one of
the men in a red cap, or by somebody like themselves, initiated in the
mysteries of the section."

" Sometimes," says one of the leaders,[21] "we find only ten members
of the club at the general assembly of the section; but there are
enough of us to intimidate the rest.  Should any citizen of the
section make a proposition we do not like, we rise and shout that he
is an schemer, or a signer (of former constitutional petitions).  In
this way we impose silence on those who are not in line with the
club." -

 Since September, 1793, operation is all the easier because the
majority, is now composed of beasts of burden, ruled with an iron
hand.

"When something has to be effected that depends on intrigue or on
private interest,[22] the motion is always put by one of the members
of the Revolutionary Committee of the section, or by one of those
fanatical patriots who join in with the Committee, and otherwise act
as its spies.  Immediately the ignorant men, to whom Danton has
allowed forty sous for each meeting, and who, from now on crowd an
assembly, where they never came before, welcome the proposition with
loud applause, shouting and demanding a vote, and the act is passed
unanimously, notwithstanding the contrary opinions of all well-
informed and honest citizens.  Should any one dare make an objection,
he would run the risk of imprisonment as a suspect,[23] after being
treated as an aristocrat or federalist, or at least, refused a
certificate of civism, ( a serious matter) if he had the misfortune to
need one, did his survival depend on this, either as employee or
pensioner." - In the Maison-Commune section, most of the auditory are
masons, "excellent patriots," says one of the clubbists of the
quarter:[24] they always vote on our side; we make them do what we
want." Numbers of day-laborers, cab-drivers, cartmen and workmen of
every class, thus earn their forty sous, and have no idea that
anything else might be demanded from them.  On entering the hall, when
the meeting opens, they write down their names, after which they go
out "to take a drink," without thinking themselves obliged to listen
to the rigmarole of the orators; towards the end, they come back, make
all the noise that is required of them with their lungs, feet and
hands, and then go and "take back their card and get their money."[25]
- With paid applauders of this stamp, they soon get the better of any
opponents, or, rather, all opposition is suppressed beforehand.  "The
best citizens keep silent" in the section assemblies, or "stay away;"
these are simply "gambling-shops" where "the most absurd, the most
unjust, the most impolitic of resolutions are passed at every
moment.[26]  Moreover, citizens are ruined there by the unlimited
sectional expenditure, which exceeds the usual taxation and the
communal expenses, already very heavy.  At one time, some carpenter or
locksmith, member of the Revolutionary Committee, wants to construct,
enlarge or decorate a hall, and it is necessary to agree with him.
Again, a poor speech is made, full of exaggeration and political
extravagance, of which three, four, five and six thousand impressions
are ordered to be printed.  Then, to cap the climax, following the
example of the Commune, no accounts are rendered, or, if this is done
for form's sake, no fault must be found with them, under penalty of
suspicion, etc." -- The twelve leaders, proprietors and distributors
of civism, have only to agree amongst themselves to share the profits,
each according to his appetite; henceforth, cupidity and vanity are
free to sacrifice the common weal, under cover of the common interest.
- The pasture is vast and it is at the disposal of the leaders.  In
one of his orders of the day, Henriot says:[27]

 "I am very glad to announce to my brethren in arms that all the
positions are at the disposal of the government.  The actual
government, which is revolutionary, whose intentions are pure, and
which merely desires the happiness of all, .  .  .  .  will search
everywhere, even into the attics for virtuous men, .  .  .  .  poor
and genuine sans-culottes." And there is enough to satisfy them
thirty-five thousand places of public employment in the capital
alone:[28] it is a rich mine; already, before the month of May, 1793,
"the Jacobin club boasted of having placed nine thousand agents in the
administration,"[29] and since the 2nd of June, "virtuous men, poor,
genuine sans-culottes," arrive in crowds from "their garrets," dens
and hired rooms, each to grab his share.  -- They besiege and install
themselves by hundreds the ancient offices in the War, Navy and
Public-Works departments, in the Treasury and Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.  Here they rule, constantly denouncing all the remaining,
able employees thus creating vacancies in order to fill them.[30] Then
there are twenty new administrative departments which they keep for
themselves: commissioners of the first confiscation of national
property, commissioners of national property arising from emigrants
and the convicted, commissioners of conscripted carriage-horses,
commissioners on clothing, commissioners on the collecting and
manufacturing of saltpeter, commissioners on monopolies, civil-
commissioners in each of the forty-eight sections, commissioners on
propagandas in the departments, Commissioners on provisions, and many
others.  Fifteen hundred places are counted in the single department
of subsistence in Paris,[31] and all are salaried.  Here, already, are
a number of desirable offices.  - Some are for the lowest rabble, two
hundred, at twenty sous a day, paid to "stump-speakers," employed to
direct opinion in the Palais-Royal, also among the Tuileries groups,
as well as in the tribunes of the Convention and of the Hôtel-de-
Ville;[32] two hundred more at four hundred francs per annum, to
waiters in coffee-houses, gambling-saloons and hotels, for watching
foreigners and customers; hundreds of places at two, three, and five
francs a day with meals, for the guardians of seals, and for
garrisoning the domiciles of "suspects"; thousands, with premiums,
pay, and full license, for brigands who, under Ronsin, compose the
revolutionary army, and for the gunners, paid guard and gendarmes of
Henriot.  -  The principal posts, however, are those which subject
lives and freedom to the discretion of those who occupy them: for,
through this more than regal power, they possess all other power, and
such is that of the men composing the forty-eight revolutionary
committees, the bureaus of the Committee of General Security and of
the Commune, and the staff-officers of the armed force.  They are the
prime-movers and active incentives of the system of Terror, all picked
Jacobins and tested by repeated selection, all designated or approved
by the Central Club, which claims for itself the monopoly of
patriotism, and which, erected into a supreme council of the party,
issues no patent of orthodoxy except to its own henchmen.[33]

They immediately assume the tone and arrogance of dictatorship.  "
Pride has reached its highest point:[34] ...  One who, yesterday, had
no post and was amiable and honest, has become haughty and insolent
because, deceived by appearances, his fellow-citizens have elected him
commissioner, or given him some employment or other." Henceforth, he
behaves like a Turkish agha amongst infidels, and, in command, carries
things out with a high hand.  -  On the 20th of Vendémiaire, year II.,
"in the middle of the night," the committee of the Piques section
summons M. Bélanger, the architect.  He is notified that his house is
wanted immediately for a new Bastille.  - "But, said he, 'I own no
other, and it is occupied by several tenants; it is decorated with
models of art, and is fit only for that purpose.' - 'Your house or you
go to prison!' - 'But I shall be obliged to indemnify my tenants.' -
'Either your house or you go to prison; as to indemnities, we have
vacant lodgings for your tenants, as well as for yourself, in (the
prisons of) La Force, or Sainte-Pélagie.' Twelve sentinels on the post
start off at once and take possession of the premises; the owner is
allowed six hours to move out and is forbidden, henceforth, to return;
the bureaus, to which he appeals, interpret his obedience as 'tacit
adhesion,' and, very soon, he himself is locked up."[35] -
Administrative tools that cut so sharply need the greatest care, and,
from time to time, they are carefully oiled:[36] on the 20th of July,
1793, two thousand francs are given to each of the forty-eight
committees, and eight thousand francs to General Henriot, "for
expenses in watching anti-revolutionary maneuvers;" on the 7th of
August, fifty thousand francs "to indemnify the less successful
members of the forty-eight committees;" three hundred thousand francs
to Gen.  Henriot "for thwarting conspiracies and securing the triumph
of liberty;" fifty thousand francs to the mayor, "for detecting the
plots of the malevolent;" on the 10th of September, forty thousand
francs to the mayor, president and procureur-syndic of the department,
"for measures of security; " on the 13th of September, three hundred
thousand francs to the mayor "for preventing the attempts of the
malevolent;" on the 15th of November, one hundred thousand francs to
the popular clubs, "because these are essential to the propagation of
sound principles." - Moreover, besides gratuities and a fixed salary,
there are the gratifications and perquisites belonging to the
office.[37] Henriot appoints his comrades on the staff of paid spies
and denunciators, and, naturally, they take advantage of their
position to fill their pockets; under the pretext of incivism, they
multiply domiciliary visits, make the master of the house ransom
himself, or steal what suits them on the premises.[38] - In the
Commune, and on the revolutionary-committees, every extortion can be,
and is, practiced.

 "I know," says Quevremont, "two citizens who have been put in prison,
without being told why, and, at the end of three weeks or a month, let
out and do you know how? By paying, one of them, fifteen thousand
livres, and the other, twenty-five thousand.  .  .  .   Gambron, at La
Force, pays one thousand five hundred livres a month for a room not to
live amongst lice, and besides this, he had to pay a bribe of two
thousand livres on entering.  This happened to many others who, again,
dared not speak of it, except in a whisper."[39]

Woe to the imprudent who, never concerning themselves with public
affairs, and relying on their innocence, discard the officious broker
and fail to pay up at once! Brichard, the notary, having refused or
tendered too late, the hundred thousand crowns demanded of him, is to
put his head "at the red window." - And I omit ordinary rapine, the
vast field open to extortion through innumerable inventories,
sequestrations and adjudications, through the enormities of
contractors, through hastily executed purchases and deliveries,
through the waste of two or three millions given weekly by the
government to the Commune for supplies for the capital, through the
requisitions of grain which give fifteen hundred men of the
revolutionary army an opportunity to clean out all the neighboring
farms, as far as Corbeil and Meaux, and benefit by this after the
fashion of the chauffeurs.[40] - With such a staff, these anonymous
thefts cannot surprise us.  Babeuf, the falsifier of public contracts,
is secretary for provisions to the Commune; Maillard, the Abbaye
Septembriseur, receives eight thousand francs for his direction, in
the forty-eight sections, of the ninety-six observers and leaders of
public opinion; Chrétien, whose smoking-shop serves as the rendezvous
of rowdies, becomes a juryman at eighteen francs a day in the
revolutionary Tribunal, and leads his section with uplifted saber;[41]
De Sade, professor of crimes, is now the oracle of his quarter, and,
in the name of the Piques Section, he reads addresses to the
Convention.

III.

A Minister of Foreign Affairs.  - A General in command.  - The Paris
Commune.  - A Revolutionary Committee.

Let us examine some of these figures closely: the nearer they are to
the eye and foremost in position, the more the importance of the duty
brings into light the unworthiness of the potentate.  -  There is
already one of them, whom we have seen in passing, Buchot, twice
noticed by Robespierre under his own hand as "a man of probity,
energetic and capable of fulfilling the most important functions,"[42]
appointed by the Committee of Public Safety "Commissioner on External
Relations," that is to say, Minister of Foreign Affairs, and kept in
this important position for nearly six months.  He is a school-master
from the Jura,[43] recently disembarked from his small town and whose
"ignorance, low habits and stupidity surpass anything that can be
imagined .  .  .  The chief clerks have nothing to do with him; he
neither sees nor asks for them.  He is never found in his office, and
when it is indispensable to ask for his signature on any legislative
matter, the sole act to which he has reduced his functions, they are
compelled to go and force it from him in the Café Hardy, where he
usually passes his days." It must be borne in mind that he is envious
and spiteful, avenging himself for his incapacity on those whose
competency makes him sensible of his incompetence; he denounces them
as Moderates, and, at last, succeeds in having a warrant of arrest
issued against his four chief clerks; on the morning of Thermidor 9,
with a wicked leer, he himself carries the news to one of them, M.
Miot.  Unfortunately for him, after Thermidor, he is turned out and M.
Miot is put in his place.  With diplomatic politeness, the latter
calls on his predecessor and "expresses to him the usual compliments."
Buchot, insensible to compliments, immediately thinks of the
substantial, and the first thing he asks for is to keep provisionally
his apartment in the ministry.  On this being granted, he expresses
his thanks and tells M. Miot that it was very well to appoint him,
but "for myself, it is very disagreeable.  I have been obliged to come
to Paris and quit my post in the provinces, and now they leave me in
the street." Thereupon, with astounding impudence, he asks the man
whom he wished to guillotine to give him a place as ministerial clerk.
M. Miot tries to make him understand that for a former minister to
descend so low would be improper.  Buchot regards such delicacy as
strange, and, seeing M. Miot's embarrassment, he ends by saying: "If
you don't find me fit for a clerk, I shall be content with the place
of a servant." This estimate of himself shows his proper value.

The other, whom we have also met before, and who is already known by
his acts,[44] general in Paris of the entire armed force, commander-
in-chief of one hundred and ten thousand men, is that former servant
or under-clerk of the procureur Formey, who, dismissed by his employer
for robbery, shut up in Bicêtre, by turns a runner and announcer for a
traveling show, barrier-clerk and September assassin, has purged the
Convention on the 2nd of June - in short, the famous Henriot, and now
simply a brute and a sot.  In this latter capacity, spared on the
trial of the Hébertists, he is kept as a tool, for the reason,
doubtless, that he is narrow, coarse and manageable, more compromised
than anybody else, good for any job, without the slightest chance of
becoming independent, unemployed in the army,45 having no prestige
with true soldiers, a general for street parade and an interloper and
lower than the lowest of the mob; his mansion, his box at the Opera-
Comique, his horses, his importance at festivals and reviews, and,
above all, his orgies make him perfectly content.  - Every evening, in
full uniform, escorted by his aides-de-camp, he gallops to Choisy-sur-
Seine, where, in the domicile of a flatterer named Fauvel, along with
some of Robespierre's confederates or the local demagogues, he revels.
They toss off the wines of the Duc de Coigny, smash the glasses,
plates and bottles, betake themselves to neighboring dance-rooms and
kick up a row, bursting in doors, and breaking benches and chairs to
pieces - in short, they have a good time.  - The next morning, having
slept himself sober, he dictates his orders for the day, veritable
masterpieces in which the silliness, imbecility and credulity of a
numskull, the sentimentality of the drunkard, the clap-trap of a
mountebank and the tirades of a cheap philosopher form an unique
compound, at once sickening and irritating, like the fiery, pungent
mixtures of cheap bars, which suit his audience better because they
contain the biting, mawkish ingredients that compose the adulterated
brandy of the Revolution.  -  He is posted on foreign maneuvers, and
enlarges upon the true reasons for the famine: "A lot of bread has
been lately found in the privies: the Pitts and Cobourgs and other
rascals who want to enslave justice and reason, and assassinate
philosophy, must be called to account for this.  Headquarters,
etc."[46] He has theories on religions and preaches civic modesty to
all dissenters: "The ministers and sectaries of every form of worship
are requested not to practice any further religious ceremonies outside
their temples.  Every good sectarian will see the propriety of
observing this order.  The interior of a temple is large enough for
paying one's homage to the Eternal, who requires no rites that are
repulsive to every thinking man.  The wise agree that a pure heart is
the sublimest homage that Divinity can desire.  Headquarters, etc." -
He sighs for the universal idyllic state, and invokes the suppression
of the armed force:

 "I beg my fellow-citizens, who are led to the criminal courts out of
curiosity, to act as their own police; this is a task which every good
citizen should fulfill wherever he happens to be.  In a free country,
justice should not be secured by pikes and bayonets, but through
reason and philosophy.  These must maintain a watchful eye over
society; these must purify it and proscribe thieves and evil-doers.
Each individual must bring his small philosophic portion with him and,
with these small portions, compose a rational totality that will turn
out to be of benefit and to the welfare of all.  Oh, for the time when
functionaries shall be rare, when the wicked shall be overthrown, when
the law shall become the sole functionary in society! Headquarters,
etc.  " -- Every morning, he preaches in the same pontifical strain.
Imagine the scene - Henriot's levee at head-quarters, and a writing
table, with, perhaps, a bottle of brandy on it; on one side of the
table, the rascal who, while buckling on his belt or drawing on his
boots, softens his husky voice, and, with his nervous twitchings,
flounders through his humanitarian homily; on the other side the mute,
uneasy secretary, who may probably be able to spell, but who dares not
materially change the grotesque phraseology of his master.

The Commune which employs the commanding-general is of about the same
alloy, for, in the municipal sword, the blade and hilt, forged
together in the Jacobin shop, are composed of the same base metal.  -
Fifty-six, out of eighty-eight members, whose qualifications and
occupations are known, are decidedly illiterate, or nearly so, their
education being rudimentary, or none at all.[47] Some of them are
petty clerks, counter-jumpers and common scribblers, one among them
being a public writer; others are small shopkeepers, pastry-cooks,
mercers, hosiers, fruit-sellers and wine-dealers; yet others are
simple mechanics or even laborers, carpenters, joiners, cabinet-
makers, locksmiths, and especially three tailors, four hair-dressers,
two masons, two shoemakers, one cobbler, one gardener; one stone-
cutter, one paver, one office-runner, and one domestic.  Among the
thirty-two who are instructed, one alone has any reputation, Paris,
professor at the University and the assistant of Abbé Delille.  Only
one, Dumetz, an old engineer, steady, moderate and attending to the
supplies, seems a competent and useful workman.  The rest, collected
from amongst the mass of unknown demagogues, are six art-apprentices
or bad painters, six business-agents or ex-lawyers, seven second or
third-rate merchants, one teacher, one surgeon, one unfrocked married
priest, all of whom, under the political direction of Mayor Fleuriot-
Lescot and Payen, the national agent, bring to the general council no
administrative ability, but the faculty for verbal argumentation,
along with the requisite amount of talk and scribbling indispensable
to a deliberative assembly.  And it is curious to see them in session.
Toward the end of September, 1793,[48] one of the veterans of liberal
philosophy and political economy, belonging to the French Academy and
ruined by the Revolution, the old Abbé Morellet, needs a certificate
of civism, to enable him to obtain payment of the small pension of one
thousand francs, which the Constituent Assembly had voted him in
recompense for his writings; the Commune, desiring information about
this, selects three of its body to inquire into it.  Morellet
naturally takes the preliminary steps.  He first writes "a very
humble, very civic note," to the president of the General Council,
Lubin Jr., formerly an art-apprentice who had abandoned art for
politics, and is now living with his father a butcher, in the rue St.
Honoré; he calls on this authority, and passes through the stall,
picking his way amongst the slaughterhouse offal; admitted after some
delay, he finds his judge in bed, before whom he pleads his cause.  He
then calls upon Bernard, an ex-priest, "built like an incendiary and
ill-looking," and respectfully bows to the lady of the house, "a
tolerably young woman, but very ugly and very dirty." Finally, he
carries his ten or a dozen volumes to the most important of the three
examiners, Vialard, " ex-ladies' hair-dresser; " the latter is almost
a colleague, "for," says he, " I have always liked technicians, having
presented to the Academy of Sciences a top which I invented myself."
Nobody, however, had seen the petitioner in the streets on the 10th of
August, nor on the 2nd of September, nor on the 31st of May; how can a
certificate of civism be granted after such evidences of lukewarmness?
Morellet, not disheartened, awaits the all-powerful hair-dresser at
the Hôtel-de-Ville, and accosts him frequently as he passes along.
He, "with greater haughtiness and distraction than the most
unapproachable Minister of War would show to an infantry lieutenant,"
scarcely listens to him and walks on; he goes in and takes his seat,
and Morellet, much against his will, has to be present at ten or
twelve of these meetings.  What strange meetings, to which patriotic
deputations, volunteers and amateurs come in turn to declaim and sing;
where the president, Lubin, "decorated with his scarf," shouts the
Marseilles Hymn five or six times, "Ca Ira," and other songs of
several stanzas, set to tunes of the Comic Opera, and always "out of
time, displaying the voice, airs and songs of an exquisite Leander.  .
.  I really believe that, at the last meeting, he sung alone in this
manner three quarters of an hour at different times, the assembly
repeating the last line of the verse." - " How odd!" exclaims a common
woman alongside of Morellet, "how droll, passing all their time here,
singing in that fashion! Is that what they come here for?" - Not alone
for that: after the circus-parade is over, the ordinary haranguers,
and especially the hair-dresser, come and propose measures for murder
"in infuriate language and with fiery gesticulation." Such are the
good speakers[49] and men for show.  The others, who remain silent,
and hardly know to write, act and do the rough work.  A certain
Chalaudon, member of the Commune,[50] is one of this kind, president
of the Revolutionary Committee of the section of "L'Homme armé," and
probably an excellent man-hunter; for "the government committees
assigned to him the duty of watching the right bank of the Seine, and,
with extraordinary powers conferred on him, he rules from his back
shop one half of Paris.  Woe to those he has reason to complain of,
those who have withdrawn from, or not given him, their custom!
Sovereign of his quarter up to Thermidor 10, his denunciations are
death-warrants.  Some of the streets, especially that of Grand
Chantier, he "depopulates." And this Marais exterminator is a
"cobbler," a colleague in leather, as well as in the Commune, of Simon
the shoemaker, the preceptor and murderer of the young Dauphin.

Still lower down than this admirable municipal body, let us try to
imagine, from at least one complete example, the forty-eight
revolutionary committees who supply it with hands.  - There is one of
them of which we know all the members, where the governing class,
under full headway, can be studied on the spot and in action.[51] This
consists of the underworld, nomadic class which is revolutionary only
through its appetites; no theory and no convictions animate it; during
the first three years of the Revolution it pays no attention to, or
cares for, public matters; if, since the 10th of August, and
especially since the 2nd of June, it takes any account of these, it is
to get a living and gorge itself with plunder.  - Out of eighteen
members, simultaneously or in succession, of the "Bonnet Rouge,"
fourteen, before the 10th of August and especially since the 2nd of
June, are unknown in this quarter, and had taken no part in the
Revolution.  The most prominent among these are three painters,
heraldic, carriage and miniature, evidently ruined and idle on account
of the Revolution, a candle-dealer, a vinegar-dealer, a manufacturer
of saltpeter, and a locksmith; while of these seven personages, four
have additionally enhanced the dignity of their calling by vending
tickets for small lotteries, acting as pawnbrokers or as keepers of a
biribi[52] saloon.  Seated along with these are two upper-class
domestics, a hack-driver, an ex-gendarme dismissed from the corps, a
cobbler on the street corner, a runner on errands who was once a
carter's boy, and another who, two months before this, was a
scavenger's apprentice, the latter penniless and in tatters before he
became one of the Committee, and since that, well clad, lodged and
furnished.  Finally, a former dealer in lottery-tickets, himself a
counterfeiter by his own admission, and a jail-bird.  Four others have
been dismissed from their places for dishonesty or swindling, three
are known drunkards, two are not even Frenchmen, while the ring-
leader, the man of brains of this select company is, as usual, a
seedy, used-up lawyer, the ex-notary Pigeot, and expelled from his
professional body on account of bankruptcy.  He is probably the author
of the following speculation: After the month of September, 1793, the
Committee, freely arresting whomsoever it pleased in the quarter, and
even outside of it, makes a haul of "three hundred heads of families"
in four months, with whom it fills the old barracks it occupies in the
rue de Sèvres.  In this confined and unhealthy tenement, more than one
hundred and twenty prisoners are huddled together, sometimes ten in
one room, two in the same bed, and, for their keeping, they pay three
hundred francs a day.  As sixty-two francs of this charge are
verified, there is of this sum, (not counting other extortions or
concessions which are not official), two hundred and thirty-eight
francs profit daily for these 'honest' contractors.  Accordingly, they
live freely and have "the most magnificent dinners " in their assembly
chamber; the contribution of ten or twelve francs apiece is " nothing
" for them.  - But, in this opulent St.  Germain quarter, so many rich
and noble men and women form a herd which must be conveniently
stalled, so as to be the more easily milked.  Consequently, toward the
end of March, 1794, the Committee, to increase its business and fill
up the pen, hires a large house on the corner of the boulevard
possessing a court and a garden, where the high society of the quarter
is assigned lodgings of two rooms each, at twelve francs a day, which
gives one hundred and fifty thousand livres per annum, and, as the
rent is twenty-four hundred francs, the Committee gain one hundred and
forty-seven thousand six hundred livres by the operation; we must add
to this twenty sorts of profit in money and other matters - taxes on
the articles consumed and on supplies of every description, charges on
the dispatch and receipt of correspondence and other gratuities, such
as ransoms and fees.  A penned-up herd refuses nothing to its
keepers,[53] and this one less than any other; for if this herd is
plundered it is preserved, its keepers finding it too lucrative to
send it to the slaughter-house.  During the last six months of Terror,
but two out of the one hundred and sixty boarders of the "Bonnet
Rouge" Committee are withdrawn from the establishment and handed over
to the guillotine.  It is only on the 7th and 8th of Thermidor that
the Committee of Public Safety, having undertaken to empty the
prisons, breaks in upon the precious herd and disturbs the well-laid
scheme, so admirably managed.  - It was only too well managed, for it
excited jealousy; three months after Thermidor, the " Bonnet Rouge"
committee is denounced and condemned; ten are sentenced to twenty
years in irons, with the pillory in addition, and, among others, the
clever notary,[54] amidst the jeering and insults of the crowd.  - And
yet these are not the worst; their cupidity had mollified their
ferocity.  Others, less adroit in robbing, show greater cruelty in
murdering.  In any event, in the provinces as well as in Paris, in the
revolutionary committees paid three francs a day for each member, the
quality of one or the other of the officials is about the same.
According to the pay-lists which Barère keeps, there are twenty-one
thousand five hundred of these committees in France.[55]

IV.  Provincial Administration.

The administrative staff in the provinces.  - Jacobinism less in the
departmental towns than in Paris.  - Less in the country than in the
towns.  - The Revolutionary Committees in the small communes.  -
Municipal bodies lukewarm in the villages.  - Jacobins too numerous in
bourgs and small towns.  - Unreliable or hampered as agents when
belonging to the administrative bodies of large or moderate-sized
towns.  - Deficiency of locally recruited staff.

 Had the laws of March 21 and September 5, 1793, been strictly
enforced, there would, instead of 21,500 have been 45,000 of these
revolutionary committees.  They would have been composed of 540,000
members costing the public 591 millions per year.[56] This would have
made the regular administrative body, already twice as numerous and
twice as costly as under the ancient régime, an extra corps expending,
"simply in surveillance," one hundred millions more than the entire
taxation of the country, the greatness of which had excited the people
against the ancient régime.  - Happily, the poisonous and monstrous
fungal growth was only able to achieve half its intended size; neither
the Jacobin seed nor the bad atmosphere it required to make it spread
could be found anywhere.  "The people of the provinces," says a
contemporary,[57] "are not up to the level of the Revolution; it
opposes old habits and customs and the resistance of inertia to
innovations which it does not understand." "The plowman is an
estimable man," writes a missionary representative, " but he is
generally a poor patriot."[58] Actually, there is on the one hand,
less of human sediment in the departmental towns than in the great
Parisian sink, and, on the other hand, the rural population, preserved
from intellectual miasmas, better resists social epidemics than the
urban population.  Less infested with vicious adventurers, less
fruitful in disordered intellects, the provinces supply a corps of
inquisitors and terrorists with greater difficulty.

And first, in the thousands of communes which have less than five
hundred inhabitants,[59] in many other villages of greater population,
but scattered[60] and purely agricultural, especially in those in
which patois is spoken, there is a scarcity of suitable subjects for a
revolutionary committee.  People make use of their hands too much;
horny hands do not write every day; nobody desires to take up a pen,
especially to keep a register that may be preserved and some day or
other prove compromising.  It is already a difficult matter to recruit
a municipal council, to find a mayor, the two additional municipal
officers, and the national agent which the law requires; in the small
communes, these are the only agents of the revolutionary government,
and I fancy that, in most cases, their Jacobin fervor is moderate.
Municipal officer, national agent or mayor, the real peasant of that
day belongs to no party, neither royalist nor republican;[61] his
ideas are rare, too transient and too sluggish, to enable him to form
a political opinion.  All he comprehends of the Revolution is that
which nettles him, or that which he sees every day around him, with
his own eyes; to him '93 and '94 are and will remain "the time of bad
paper (money) and great fright," and nothing more.[62] Patient in his
habits., he submits to the new as he did to the ancient régime,
bearing the load put on his shoulders, and stooping down for fear of a
heavier one.  He is often mayor or national agent in spite of himself;
he has been obliged to take the place and would gladly throw the
burden off.  For, as times go, it is onerous; if he executes decrees
and orders, he is certain to make enemies; if he does not execute
them, he is sure to be imprisoned; he had better remain, or go back
home "Gros-Jean," as he was before.  But he has no choice; the
appointment being once made and confirmed, he cannot decline, nor
resign, under penalty of being a "suspect;" he must be the hammer in
order not to become the anvil.  Whether he is a wine-grower, miller,
ploughman or quarry-man, he acts reluctantly, "submitting a petition
for resignation," as soon as the Terror diminishes, on the ground that
"he writes badly," that "he knows nothing whatever about law and is
unable to enforce it;" that "he has to support himself with his own
hands;" that "he has a family to provide for, and is obliged to drive
his own cart" or vehicle; in short, entreating that he "may be
relieved of his charge."[63] - These involuntary recruits are
evidently nothing more than common laborers; if they drag along the
revolutionary cart they do it like their horses, because they are
pressed into the service.

Above the small communes, in the large villages possessing a
revolutionary committee, and also in certain bourgs, the horses in
harness often pretend to draw and do not, for fear of crushing some
one.  - At this epoch, a straggling village, especially when isolated,
in an out-of-the-way place and on no highway, is a small world in
itself, much more secluded than now-a-days, much less accessible to
Parisian verbiage and outside pressure; local opinion here
preponderates; neighbors support each other; they would shrink from
denouncing a worthy man whom they had known for twenty years; the
moral sway of honest folks suffices for keeping down
"blackguards."[64] If the mayor is republican, it is only in words,
perhaps for self-protection, to protect his commune, and because one
must howl along with the other wolves.  - - -Moreover, in other
bourgs, and in the small towns, the fanatics and rascals are not
sufficiently numerous to fill all the offices, and, in order to fill
the vacancies, those who are not good Jacobins have been pushed
forward or admitted into the new administrative corps, lukewarm,
indifferent, timid or needy men, who take the place as an asylum or
ask for it as a means of subsistence.  " Citizens," one of the
recruits, more or less under restraint, writes later on,[65] " I was
put on the Committee of Surveillance of Aignay by force, and installed
by force." Three or four madmen on it ruled, and if one held any
discussion with them, "it was always threats .  .  .  .  Always
trembling, always afraid, - that is the way I passed eight months
doing duty in that miserable place." - Finally, in medium-sized or
large towns, the dead-lock produced by collective dismissals, the
pell-mell of improvised appointments, and the sudden renewal of an
entire set of officials, threw into the administration, willingly or
not, a lot of pretended Jacobins who, at heart, are Girondists or
Feuillantists, but who, having been excessively long-winded, are
assigned offices on account of their stump-speeches, and who
thenceforth sit alongside of the worst Jacobins, in the worst
employment.  "Members of the Feurs Revolutionary Committee - those who
make that objection to me," wrote a lawyer in Clermont,[66] "are
persuaded that those only who secluded themselves, felt the Terror.
They are not aware, perhaps, that nobody felt it more than those who
were compelled to execute its decrees.  Remember that the handwriting
of Couthon which designated some citizen for an office also conveyed a
threat, and in case of refusal, of being declared 'suspect,' a threat
which promised in perspective the loss of liberty and the
sequestration of property! Was I free, then, to refuse?" - Once
installed, the man must act, and many of those who do act let their
repugnance be seen in spite of themselves: at best, they cannot be got
to do more than mechanical service.

 "Before going to court," says a judge at Cambray, "I swallowed a big
glass

  of spirits to give me strength enough to preside."

He leaves his house with no other intention than to finish the job,
and, the sentence once pronounced, to return home, shut himself up,
and close his eyes and ears.

 "I had to pronounce judgment according to the jury's declaration -
what could I do?"[67]

 Nothing, but remain blind and deaf: "I drank.  I tried to ignore
everything, even the names of the accused." - It is plain enough that,
in the local official body, there are too many agents who are weak,
not zealous, without any push, unreliable, or even secretly hostile;
these must be replaced by others who are energetic and reliable, and
the latter must be taken wherever they can be found.[68]  This
reservoir in each department or district is the Jacobin nursery of the
principal town; from this, they are sent into the bourgs and communes
of the conscription.  The central Jacobin nursery for France is in
Paris, from whence they are dispatched to the towns and departments.

V.  Jacobins sent to the Provinces.

Importation of a staff of strangers.  - Paris Jacobins sent into the
provinces.  - Jacobins of enthusiastic towns deported to moderate
ones.  - The Jacobins of a district headquarters spread through the
district.  - Resistance of public opinion.  - Distribution and small
number of really Jacobin agents.

 Consequently, swarms of Jacobin locusts spread from Paris out over
the provinces, and from the local country-towns over the surrounding
country.  - In this cloud of destructive insects, there are various
figures of different sizes: in the front rank, are the representatives
on mission, who are to take command in the departments; in the second
rank, "the political agents," who, assigned the duty of watching the
neighboring frontier, take upon themselves the additional duty of
leading the popular club of the town they reside in, or of urging on
its administrative body.[69] Besides that, there issue from the Paris
headquarters in the rue St.  Honoré, select sans-culottes who,
authorized or delegated by the Committee of Public Safety, proceed to
Lyons, Marseilles, Bordeaux, Tonnerre, Rochefort and elsewhere, to act
as missionaries among the too inert population, or form the committees
of action and the tribunals of extermination that are recruited with
difficulty on the spot.[70] - Sometimes also, when a town has a bad
record, the popular club of a sounder-minded city sends its delegates
there, to bring it into line; thus, four deputies of the Metz club
arrive without notice in Belfort, catechize their brethren, associate
with them on the local Revolutionary Committee, and, suddenly, without
consulting the municipality, or any other legal authority, draw up a
list of "moderates, fanatics and egoists," on whom they impose an
extraordinary tax of one hundred and thirty-six thousand six hundred
and seventeen livres;[71] in like manner, sixty delegates from the
club of Côte-d'Or, Haute-Marne, Vosges, Moselle, Saone-et-Loire and
Mont-Terrible, all "tempered by the white heat of Pére Duchesne,"
proceed to Strasbourg at the summons of the representatives, where,
under the title of "propagandists," they are to regenerate the town.
- At the same time, in each department, the Jacobins of the principal
town are found scattered along the high ways, that they may inspect
their domain and govern their subjects.  Sometimes, it is the
representative on mission, who, personally, along with twenty "hairy
devils," makes his round and shows off his traveling dictatorship;
again, it is his secretary or delegate who, in his place and in his
name, comes to a second-class town and draws up his documents.[72] At
another time, it is "a committee of investigation and propaganda"
which, "chosen by the club and provided with full powers," comes, in
the name of the representatives, to work up for a month all the
communes of the district.[73]  Again, finally, it is the revolutionary
committee of the principal town, which," declared central for the
whole department,"[74] delegates one or the other of its members to go
outside the walls, and purge and recompose suspected municipalities.
- Thus does Jacobinism descend and spread itself, story after story,
from the Parisian center to the smallest and remotest commune:
throughout provincial France, whether colorless or of uncertain color,
the imposed or imported administration imposes its red stigma.

But the stamp is only superficial; for the sans-culottes, naturally,
are not disposed to confer offices on any but men of their sort, while
in the provinces, especially in the rural districts, such men are
rare.  As one of the representatives says: there is a "dearth of
subjects." - At Mâcon, Javogues tries in vain;[75] he finds in the
club only "disguised federalists;" the people, he says, "will not open
their eyes it seems to me that this blindness is due to the physique
of the country, which is very rich." Naturally, he storms and
dismisses; but, even in the revolutionary committee, none but dubious
candidates are presented to him for selection; he does not know how to
manage in order to renew the local authorities.  "They play into each
others' hands," and he ends by threatening to transfer the public
institutions of the town elsewhere, if they persist in proposing to
him none but bad patriots.  - At Strasbourg,[76] Couturier, and
Dentzel, on mission, report that: "owing to an unexampled coalition
among all the capable citizens, obstinately refusing to take the
office of mayor, in order, by this course, to clog the wheels, and
subject the representatives to repeated and indecent refusals," he is
compelled to appoint a young man, not of legal age, and a stranger in
the department.  - At Marseilles, write the agents,[77] "in spite of
every effort and our ardent desire to republicanize the Marseilles
people, our pains and fatigues are nearly all fruitless.  .  .  .
Public spirit among owners of property, mechanics and journey-men is
everywhere detestable.  .  .  .  The number of discontented seems to
increase from day to day.  All the communes in Var, and most of those
in this department are against us.  .  .  .  they constitute a race to
be destroyed, a country to be colonized anew.  .  .  .

 "I repeat it, the only way to work out the Revolution in the
federalized departments, and especially in this one, is to deport all
the indigenous population who are able to bear arms, scatter them
through the armies and put garrisons in their places, which, again,
will have to be changed from time to time." - At the other extremity
of the territory, in Alsace, "republican sentiments are still in the
cradle; fanaticism is extreme and incredible; the spirit of the
inhabitants in general is in no respect revolutionary.  .  .  Nothing
but the revolutionary army and the venerated guillotine will cure them
of their conceited aristocracy.  The execution of the laws depends on
striking off the heads of the guilty, for nearly all the rural
municipalities are composed only of the rich, of clerks of former
bailiffs, almost always devoted to the ancient régime."[78]- And in
the rest of France, the population, less refractory, is not more
Jacobin; here where the people appear "humble and submissive" as in
Lyons and Bordeaux, the inspectors report that it is wholly owing to
terror;[79] there, where opinion seems enthusiastic, as at Rochefort
and Grenoble, they report that it is "artificial heat."[80]  At
Rochefort, zeal is maintained only "by the presence of five or six
Parisian Jacobins." At Grenoble, Chépy, the political agent and
president of the club, writes that "he is knocked up, worn out, and
exhausted, in trying to keep up public spirit and maintain it on a
level with events," but he is "conscious that, if he should leave, all
would crumble." - There are none other than Moderates at Brest, at
Lille, at Dunkirk; if this or that department, the Nord, for instance,
hastened to accept the "Montagnard" constitution, it is only a
pretense: "an infinitely small portion of the population answered for
the rest."[81] - At Belfort, where "from one thousand to twelve
hundred fathers of families alone are counted," writes the agent,[82]
"one popular club of thirty or forty members, at the most, maintains
and enforces the love of liberty." - In Arras, "out of three or four
hundred members composing the popular club" the weeding-out of 1793
has spared but "sixty-three, one tenth of whom are absent."[83]  At
Toulouse, "out of about fourteen hundred members" who form the club,
only three or four hundred remain after the weeding-out of 1793,[84]
"mere machines, for the most part," and "whom ten or a dozen
intriguers lead as they please." - The same state of things exists
elsewhere, a dozen or two determined Jacobins-twenty-two at Troyes,
twenty-one at Grenoble, ten at Bordeaux, seven at Poitiers, as many at
Dijon-constitute the active staff of a large town:[85] the whole
number might sit around one table.  - The Jacobins, straining as they
do to swell their numbers, only scatter their band; careful as they
are in making their selections, they only limit their number.  They
remain what they always have been, a small feudality of brigands
superposed on conquered France.[86]  If the terror they spread around
multiplies their serfs, the horror they inspire diminishes their
proselytes, while their minority remains insignificant because, for
their collaborators, they can have only those just like themselves.

VI.

Quality of staff thus formed.  - Social state of the agents.  - Their
unfitness and bad conduct.  - The administrators in Seine-et-Marne.  -
Drunkenness and feasting.  - Committees and Municipalities in the
Côte-d'Or.  - Waste and extortions.  - Traffickers in favors at
Bordeaux.  - Seal breakers at Lyons.  - Monopolizers of national
possessions.  - Sales of personal property.  - Embezzlements and
Frauds.-A procès-verbal in the office of the mayor of Strasbourg.  -
Sales of real-estate.  - Commissioners on declarations at Toulouse.  -
The administrative staff and clubs of buyers in Provence.  - The
Revolutionary Committee of Nantes.

But when we regard the final and last set of officials of the
revolutionary government closely, in the provinces as well as at
Paris, we find among them we hardly anyone who is noteworthy except in
vice, dishonesty and misconduct, or, at the very least, in stupidity
and grossness.  - First, as is indicated by their name, they all must
be, and nearly all are, sans-culottes, that is to say, men who live
from day to day on their daily earnings, possessing no income from
capital, confined to subordinate places, to petty trading, to manual
services, lodged or encamped on the lowest steps of the social ladder,
and therefore requiring pay to enable them to attend to public
business;[87] it is on this account that decrees and orders allow them
wages of three, five, six, ten, and even eighteen francs a day.  - At
Grenoble, the representatives form the municipal body and the
revolutionary committee, along with two health-officers, three
glovers, two farmers, one tobacco-merchant, one perfumer, one grocer,
one belt-maker, one innkeeper, one joiner, one shoemaker, one mason,
while the official order by which they are installed, appoints
"Teyssière, licoriste," national agent.[88] - At Troyes,[89] among the
men in authority we find a confectioner, a weaver, a journeyman-
weaver, a hatter, a hosier, a grocer, a carpenter, a dancing-master,
and a policeman, while the mayor, Gachez, formerly a private soldier
in the regiment of Vexin, was, when appointed, a school-teacher in the
vicinity.  - At Toulouse,[90] a man named Terrain, a pâté dealer, is
installed as president of the administration; the revolutionary
committee is presided over by Pio, a journeyman-barber; the
inspiration, "the soul of the club," is a concierge, that of the
prison.  - The last and most significant trait is found at
Rochefort,[91] where the president of the popular club is the
executioner.  - If such persons form the select body of officials in
the large towns, what must they be in the small ones, in the bourgs
and in the villages? " Everywhere they are of the meanest"[92]
cartmen, sabot - (wooden shoe) makers, thatchers, stone-cutters,
dealers in rabbit-skins, day laborers, unemployed craftsmen, many
without any pursuit, or mere vagabonds who had already participated in
riots or jacqueries, bar flies, having given up work and designated
for a public career only by their irregular habits and incompetence to
follow a private career.  - Even in the large towns, it is evident
that discretionary power has fallen into the hands of nearly raw
barbarians; one has only to note in the old documents, at the
Archives, the orthography and style of the committees empowered to
grant or refuse civic cards, and draw up reports on the opinions and
pursuits of prisoners.  "His opinions appear insipid (Ces opignons
paroisse insipide)[93] .  .  .  .  He is married with no children."
(Il est marie cent (sans) enfants)..  .  .  Her profession is wife of
Paillot-Montabert, she is living on her income, his relations are with
a woman we pay no attention to; we presume her opinions are like her
husband's."[94] The handwriting, unfortunately, cannot be represented
here, being that of a child five years old.[95]

"As stupid as they are immoral,"[96] says Representative Albert, of
the Jacobins he finds in office at Troyes.  Low, indeed, as their
condition may be, their feeling and intelligence are yet lower
because, in their professions or occupations, they are the refuse
instead of the élite, and, especially on this account, they are turned
out after Thermidor, some, it is true, as Terrorists, but the larger
number as either dolts, scandalous or crazy, simply intruders, or mere
valets.  - At Rheims, the president of the district is[97] "a former
bailiff, on familiar terms with the spies of the Robespierre régime,
acting in concert with them, but without being their accomplice,
possessing none of the requisite qualities for administration."
Another administrator is likewise "a former bailiff, without means,
negligent in the highest degree and a confirmed drunkard." Alongside
of these sit "a horse-dealer, without any means, more fit for shady
dealings than governing, moreover a drunkard, a dyer, lacking
judgment, open to all sorts of influences, pushed ahead by the Jacobin
faction, and having used power in the most arbitrary manner, rather,
perhaps, through ignorance than through cruelty, a shoemaker, entirely
uninstructed, knowing only how to sign his name," and others of the
same character.  In the Tribunal, a judge is noted as

"true in principle, but whom poverty and want of resources have driven
to every excess, a turncoat according to circumstances in order to get
a place, associated with the leaders in order to keep the place, and
yet not without sensibility, having, perhaps, acted criminally merely
to keep himself and his family alive."

In the municipal body, the majority is composed of an incompetent lot,
some of them being journeymen-spinners or thread twisters, and others
second-hand dealers or shopkeepers, "incapable," "without means," with
a few crack-brains among them: one, "his brain being crazed,
absolutely of no account, anarchist and Jacobin;" another, "very
dangerous through lack of judgment, a Jacobin, over-excited; " a
third, "an instrument of tyranny, a man of blood capable of every
vice, having assumed the name of Mutius Scvola, of recognized
depravity and unable to write." - Similarly, in the Aube districts, we
find some of the heads feverish with the prevailing epidemic, for
instance, at Nogent, the national agent, Delaporte, "who has the words
'guillotine' and 'revolutionary tribunal' always on his lips, and who
declares that if he were the government he would imprison doctor,
surgeon and lawyer, who delights in finding people guilty and says
that he is never content except when he gets three pounds' weight of
denunciations a day." But, apart from these madcaps, most of the
administrators or judges are either people wholly unworthy of their
offices, because they are "inept," "too uneducated," "good for
nothing," "too little familiar with administrative forms," "too little
accustomed to judicial action," " without information," "too busy with
their own affairs," "unable to read or write," or, because "they have
no delicacy," are "violent," "agitators," "knaves," "without public
esteem," and more or less dishonest and despised.[98] - As an example
a fellow from Paris, who was at first at Troyes, a baker's
apprentice,[99] and afterwards a dancing-master; then he appeared at
the Club, making headway, doubtless, through his Parisian chatter,
until he stood first and soon became a member of the district.
Appointed an officer in the sixth battalion of Aube, he behaved in
such a manner in Vendée that, on his return, " his brethren in arms"
broke up the banner presented to him, "declaring him unworthy of such
an honor, because he cowardly fled before the enemy." Nevertheless,
after a short plunge, he came back to the surface and, thanks to his
civil compeers, was reinstated in his administrative functions; during
the Terror, he was intimate with all the Terrorists, being one of the
important men of Troyes.  - The mayor of the town, Gachez, an old
soldier and ex-schoolmaster, is of the same stuff as this baker's
apprentice.  He, likewise, was a Vendéan hero; only, he was unable to
distinguish himself as much as he liked, for, after enlisting, he
failed to march; having pocketed the bounty of three hundred livres,
he discovered that he had infirmities and, getting himself
invalidated, he served the nation in a civil capacity.  "His own
partisans admit that he is a drunkard and that he has committed
forgery." Some months after Thermidor he is sentenced to eight years
imprisonment and put in the pillory for this crime.  Hence, "almost
the entire commune is against him; the women in the streets jeer him,
and the eight sections meet together to request his withdrawal." But
Representative Bô reports that he is every way entitled to remain,
being a true Jacobin, an admirable terrorist and "the only sans-
culotte mayor which the commune of Troyes has to be proud of."[100]

It would be awarding too much honor to men of this stamp, to suppose
that they had convictions or principles; they were governed by
animosities and especially by their appetites,[101] to satiate which
they[102] made the most of their offices.  - At Troyes, "all
provisions and foodstuffs are drawn upon to supply the table of the
twenty-four" sans-culottes[103] to whom Bô entrusted the duty of
weeding-out the popular club; before the organization of "this
regenerating nucleus" the revolutionary committee, presided over by
Rousselin, the civil commissioner, carried on its "gluttony" in the
Petit-Louvre tavern, "passing nights bozing" and in the preparation of
lists of suspects.[104] In the neighboring provinces of Dijon, Beaune,
Semur and Aignayle-Duc, the heads of the municipality and of the club
always meet in taverns and bars.  At Dijon, we see "the ten or twelve
Hercules of patriotism traversing the town, each with a chalice under
his arm:"[105] this is their drinking-cup; each has to bring his own
to the Montagnard inn; there, they imbibe copiously, frequently, and
between two glasses of wine "declare who are outlaws." At Aignay-le-
Duc, a small town with only half a dozen patriots "the majority of
whom can scarcely write, most of them poor, burdened with families,
and living without doing anything, never quit the bars, where, night
and day, they revel;" their chief, a financial ex-procureur, now
"concierge, archivist, secretary and president of the popular club,"
holds municipal council in the tavern.  "Should they go out it was to
chase female aristocrats," and one of them declares "that if the half
of Aignay were slaughtered the other half would be all the better for
it." - There is nothing like drinking to excite ferocity to the
highest pitch.  At Strasbourg the sixty mustachioed propagandist
lodged in the college in which they are settled fixtures, have a cook
provided for them by the town, and they revel day and night "on the
choice provisions put in requisition," "on wines destined to the
defenders of the country."[106] It is, undoubtedly, when coming out
from one of these orgies that they proceed, sword in hand, to the
popular club,[107] vote and force others to vote "death to all
prisoners confined in the Seminary to the number of seven hundred, of
every age and of both sexes, without any preliminary trial." For a man
to become a good cut-throat, he must first get intoxicated;[108] such
was the course pursued in Paris by those who did the work in
September: the revolutionary government being an organized, prolonged
and permanent Septembrisade, most of its agents are obliged to drink
hard.[109] - For the same reasons when the opportunity, as well as the
temptation, to steal, presents itself, they steal.  - At first, during
six months, and up to the decree assigning them pay, the revolutionary
committees "take their pay themselves;"[110] they then add to their
legal salary of three and five francs a day about what they please:
for it is they who assess the extraordinary taxes, and often, as at
Montbrison, "without making any list or record of collections." On
Frimaire 16, year II., the financial committee reports that "the
collection and application of extraordinary taxes is unknown to the
government; that it was impossible to supervise them, the National
treasury having received no sums whatever arising from these
taxes."[111] Two years after, four years after, the accounts of
revolutionary taxation of forced loans, and of pretended voluntary
gifts, still form a bottomless pit; out of forty billions of accounts
rendered to the National Treasury only twenty are found to be
verified; the rest are irregular and worthless.  Besides, in many
cases, not only is the voucher worthless or not forthcoming, but,
again, it is proved that the sums collected disappeared wholly or in
part.  At Villefranche, out of one hundred and thirty-eight thousand
francs collected, the collector of the district deposited but forty-
two thousand; at Baugency, out of more than five hundred thousand
francs collected, there were only fifty thousand deposited; at la
Réole, out of at least five hundred thousand francs collected, there
were but twenty-two thousand six hundred and fifty deposited.  "The
rest," says the collector at Villefranche, "were wasted by the
Committee of Surveillance." "The tax-collectors," writes the national-
agent at Orleans, "after having employed terror gave themselves up to
orgies and are now building palaces."[112] - As to the expenses which
they claim, they almost always consist of "indemnities to members of
revolutionary committees, to patriots, and to defray the cost of
patriotic missions," to maintaining and repairing the meeting-rooms of
the popular clubs, to military expeditions, and to succoring the poor,
so that three or four hundred millions in gold or silver, extorted
before the end of 1793, hundreds of millions of assignats extorted in
1793 and 1794, in short, almost the entire product of the total
extraordinary taxation[113] was consumed on the spot and by the sans-
culottes.  Seated at the public banqueting table they help themselves
first, and help themselves copiously.

A second windfall, equally gross.  Enjoying the right to dispose
arbitrarily of fortunes, liberties and lives, they can traffic in
these, while no traffic can be more advantageous, both for buyers and
sellers.  Any man who is rich or well-off, in other words, every man
who is likely to be taxed, imprisoned or guillotined, gladly consents
"to compound," to redeem himself and those who belong to him.  If he
is prudent, he pays, before the tax, so as not to be over-taxed; he
pays, after the tax, to obtain a diminution or delays; he pays to be
admitted into the popular club.  When danger draws near he pays to
obtain or renew his certificate of civism, not to be declared
"suspect," not to be denounced as a conspirator.  After being
denounced, he pays to be allowed imprisonment at home rather than in
the jail, to be allowed imprisonment in the jail rather than in the
general prison, to be well treated if he gets into this, to have time
to get together his proofs in evidence, to have his record (dossier)
placed and kept at the bottom of the file among the clerk's registers,
to avoid being inscribed on the next batch of cases in the
revolutionary Tribunal.  There is not one of these favors that is not
precious; consequently, ransoms without number are tendered, while the
rascals[114] who swarm on the revolutionary committees, need but open
their hands to fill their pockets.  They run very little risk, for
they are held in check only by their own kind, or are not checked at
all.  In any large town, two of them suffice for the issue of a
warrant of arrest save a reference to the Committee within twenty-four
hours, with the certainty that their colleagues will kindly return the
favor.[115] Moreover, the clever ones know how to protect themselves
beforehand.  For example, at Bordeaux, where one of these clandestine
markets had been set up, M. Jean Davilliers, one of the partners in a
large commercial house, is under arrest in his own house, guarded by
four sans-culottes; on the 8th of Brumaire, he is taken aside and told
"that he is in danger if he does not come forward and meet the
indispensable requirements of the Revolution in its secret
expenditures." An important figure, Lemoal, member of the
revolutionary committee and administrator of the district, had spoken
of these requirements and thought that M. Davilliers should
contribute the sum of one hundred and fifty thousand livres.  Upon
this, a knock at the door is heard; Lemoal enters and all present slip
out of the room, and Lemoal pronounces these words only: "Do you
consent?" - "But I cannot thus dispose of my partners' property." -
"Then you will go to prison." At this threat the poor man yields and
gives his note to Lemoal at twenty days, payable to bearer, for one
hundred and fifty thousand livres, and, at the end of a fortnight, by
dint of pushing his claims, obtains his freedom.  Thereupon, Lemoal
thinks the matter over, and deems it prudent to cover up his private
extortion by a public one.  Accordingly, he sends for M. Davilliers :
"It is now essential for you to openly contribute one hundred and
fifty thousand livres more for the necessities of the Republic.  I
will introduce you to the representatives to whom you should make the
offer." The chicken being officially plucked in this way, nobody would
suppose that it had been first privately plucked, and, moreover, the
inquisitive, if there were any, would be thrown off the scent by the
confusion arising from two sums of equal amount.  M. Davilliers begs
to be allowed to consult his partners, and, as they are not in prison,
they refuse.  Lemoal, on his side, is anxious to receive the money for
his note, while poor Davilliers, "struck with terror by nocturnal
arrests," and seeing that Lemoal is always on the top of the ladder,
concludes to pay; at first, he gives him thirty thousand livres, and
next, the charges, amounting in all to forty-one thousand livres,
when, being at the end of his resources, he begs and entreats to have
his note returned to him.  Lemoal, on this, considering the chicken as
entirely stripped, becomes mollified, and tears off in presence of his
debtor "the signature in full of the note," and, along with this, his
own receipts for partial payments underneath.  But he carefully
preserves the note itself, for, thus mutilated, it will show, if
necessary, that he had not received anything, and that, through
patriotism, he had undoubtedly wished to force a contribution from a
merchant, but, finding him insolvent, had humanely canceled the
written obligation.[116] - Such are the precautions taken in this
business.  Others, less shrewd, rob more openly, among others the
mayor, the seven members of the military commission surnamed "the
seven mortal sins," and especially their president, Lacombe, who, by
promising releases, extracts from eight or nine captives three hundred
and fifty-nine thousand six hundred livres.[117]  "Through such
schemes," writes a rigid Jacobin,[118] "many of those who had been
declared outlaws returned to Bordeaux by paying; of the number who
thus redeemed their lives, some did not deserve to lose it, but,
nevertheless, they were threatened with execution if they did not
consent to everything.  But material proofs of this are hard to
obtain.  These men now keep silent, for fear, through open
denunciation, of sharing in the penalty of the traffickers in justice,
and being unwilling to expose (anew) the life they have preserved." In
short, the plucked pigeon is mute, so as not to attract attention, as
well as to avoid the knife; and all the more, because those who pluck
him hold on to the knife and might, should he cry out, dispatch him
with the more celerity.  Even if he makes no noise, they sometimes
dispatch him so as to stifle in advance any possible outcry, which
happened to the Duc du Chatelet and others.  There is but one mode of
self-preservation[119] and that is, "to settle with such masters by
installments, to pay them monthly, like wet nurses, on a scale
proportionate to the activity of the guillotine." - In any event, the
pirates are not disturbed, for the trade in lives and liberties leaves
no trace behind it, and is carried on with impunity for two years,
from one end of France to the other, according to a tacit
understanding between sellers and buyers.

There is a third windfall, not less large, but carried on in more open
sunshine and therefore still more enticing.  - Once the "suspect is
incarcerated, whatever he brings to prison along with him, whatever he
leaves behind him at home, becomes plunder; for, with the
incompleteness, haste and irregularity of papers,[120] with the lack
of surveillance and known connivance, the vultures, great and small,
could freely use their beaks and talons.  - At Toulouse, as in Paris
and elsewhere, commissioners take from prisoners every object of value
and, accordingly, in many cases, all gold, silver, assignats, and
jewelry, which, confiscated for the Treasury, stop half-way in the
hands of those who make the seizure.[121]  At Poitiers, the seven
scoundrels who form the ruling oligarchy, admit, after Thermidor, that
they stole the effects of arrested parties.[122] At Orange, "Citoyenne
Riot," wife of the public prosecutor, and "citoyennes Fernex and
Ragot," wives of two judges, come in person to the record-office to
make selections from the spoils of the accused, taking for their
wardrobe silver shoe-buckles, laces and fine linen.[123] - But all
that the accused, the imprisoned and fugitives can take with them,
amounts to but little in comparison with what they leave at home, that
is to say, under sequestration.  All the religious or seignorial
chateaux and mansions in France are in this plight, along with their
furniture, and likewise most of the fine bourgeois mansions, together
with a large number of minor residences, well-furnished and supplied
through provincial economy; besides these, nearly every warehouse and
store belonging to large manufacturers and leading commercial houses;
all this forms colossal spoil, such as was never seen before,
consisting of objects one likes to possess, gathered in vast lots,
which lots are distributed by hundreds of thousands over the twenty-
six thousand square miles of territory.  There are no owners for this
property but the nation, an indeterminate, invisible personage; no
barrier other than so many seals exists between the spoils and the
despoilers, that is to say, so many strips of paper held fast by two
ill-applied and indistinct stamps.  Bear in mind, too, that the
guardians of the spoil are the sans-culottes who have made a conquest
of it; that they are poor; that such a profusion of useful or precious
objects makes them feel the bareness of their homes all the more; that
their wives would like to lay in a stock of furniture; moreover, has
it not held out to them from the beginning of the Revolution, that
"forty-thousand mansions, palaces and chateaux, two-thirds of the
property of France, would be the reward of their valor?"[124]  At this
very moment, does not the representative on mission authorize their
greed? Are not Albitte and Collot d'Herbois at Lyons, Fouché at
Nevers, Javogues at Montbrison, proclaiming that the possessions of
anti-revolutionaries and a surplus of riches form "the patrimony of
the sans-culottes?"[125]  Do they not read in the proclamations of
Monestier,[126] that the peasants "before leaving home may survey and
measure off the immense estates of their seigneurs, choose, for
example, on their return, whatever they want to add to their farm .  .
.  .  tacking on a bit of field or rabbit-warren belonging to the
former count or marquis?" Why not take a portion of his furniture, any
of his beds or clothes-presses - - It is not surprising that, after
this, the slip of paper which protects sequestrated furniture and
confiscated merchandise should be ripped off by gross and greedy
hands! When, after Thermidor, the master returns to his own roof it is
generally to an empty house; in this or that habitation in the
Morvan,[127] the removal of the furniture is so complete that a bin
turned upside down serves for a table and chairs, when the family sit
down to their first meal.

In the towns the embezzlements are often more brazenly carried out
than in the country.  At Valenciennes, the Jacobin chiefs of the
municipality are known under the title of "seal-breakers and patriotic
robbers."[128]  At Lyons, the Maratists, who dub themselves "the
friends of Chalier," are, according to the Jacobins' own admission,
"brigands, thieves and rascals."[129] They compose, to the number of
three or four hundred, the thirty-two revolutionary committees; one
hundred and fifty of leaders, "all of them administrators," form the
popular club; in this town of one hundred and twenty thousand souls
they number, as they themselves state, three thousand, and they firmly
rely on "sharing with each other the wealth of Lyons.  This huge cake
belongs to them; they do not allow that strangers, Parisians, should
have a slice,[130] and they intend to eat the whole of it, at
discretion, without control, even to the last crumb.  As to their mode
of operations, it consists in "selling justice, in trading on
denunciations, in holding under sequestration at least four thousand
households," in putting seals everywhere on dwellings and warehouses,
in not summoning interested parties who might watch their proceedings,
in expelling women, children and servants who might testify to their
robberies, in not drawing up inventories, in installing themselves as
"guardians at five francs a day," themselves or their boon companions,
and in "general squandering, in league with the administrators." It is
impossible to stay their hands or repress them, even for the
representatives.   Take them in the act,[131] and you must shut your
eyes or they will all shout at the oppression of patriots; they do
this systematically so that nobody may be followed up.

We passed an order forbidding any authority to remove seals without
our consent, and, in spite of the prohibition, they broke into a
storehouse under sequestration, .  .  .  .  forced the locks and
pillaged, under our own eyes, the very house we occupy.  And who are
these devastators? Two commissioners of the Committee who emptied the
storehouse without our warrant, and even without having any power from
the Committee." - It is a sack in due form, and day after day; it
began on the 10th of October, 1793; it continued after, without
interruption, and we have just seen that, on Floréal 28, year II.,
that is to say, April 26, 1794, after one hundred and twenty-three
days, it is still maintained.

The last mad scramble and the most extensive of all.  - In spite of
the subterfuges of its agents, the Republic, having stolen immensely,
and although robbed in its turn, could still hold on to a great deal;
and first, to articles of furniture which could not be easily
abstracted, to large lots of merchandise, also to the vast spoil of
the palaces, chateaux and churches; next, and above all, to real
estate, fixtures and buildings.  To meet its expenses it put all that
up for sale, and whoever wants anything has only to come forward as a
buyer, the last bidder becoming the legal owner and at a cheap rate.
The wood cut down in one year very often pays for a whole forest.[132]
Sometimes a chateau can be paid for by a sale of the iron-railings of
the park, or the lead on the roof.  - Here are found chances for a
good many bargains, and especially with objects of art.  "The titles
alone of the articles carried off, destroyed or injured, would fill
volumes."[133] On the one hand, the commissioners on inventories and
adjudications, "having to turn a penny on the proceeds of sales,"
throw on the market all they can, "avoiding reserving" objects of
public utility and sending collections and libraries to auction with a
view to get their percentages.  On the other hand, nearly all these
commissioners are brokers or second-hand dealers who alone know the
value of rarities, and openly depreciate them in order to buy them in
themselves, "and thus ensure for themselves exorbitant profits." In
certain cases the official guardians and purchasers who are on the
look-out take the precaution to disfigure " precious articles " so as
to have them bought by their substitutes and accomplices: "for
instance, they convert sets of books into odd volumes, and take
machines to pieces; the tube and object-glass of a telescope are
separated, which pieces the rogues who have bought them cheap know how
to put together again." Often, in spite of the seals, they take in
advance antiques, pieces of jewelry, medals, enamels and engraved
stones;" nothing is easier, for "even in Paris in Thermidor, year II.,
agents of the municipality use anything with which to make a stamp,
buttons, and even large pennies, so that whoever has a sou can remove
and re-stamp the seals as he pleases;" having been successful, "they
screen their thefts by substituting cut pebbles and counterfeit stones
for real ones." Finally, at the auction sales, "fearing the honesty or
competition of intelligent judges, they offer money (to these) to stay
away from the sales; one case is cited where they have knocked a
prospective bidder down." In the meantime, at the club, they shout
with all their might; this, with the protection of a member of the
municipality or of the Revolutionary Committee, shelters them from all
suspicion.  As for the protector, he gets his share without coming out
into the light.  Accuse, if you dare, a republican functionary who
secretly, or even openly, profits by these larcenies; he will show
clean hands.  - Such is the incorruptible patriot, the only one of his
species, whom the representatives discover at Strasbourg, and whom
they appoint mayor at once.  On the 10th of Vendémiaire, year
III.,[134] there is found "in his apartments" a superb and complete
assortment of ecclesiastical objects, "forty-nine copes and chasubles,
silk or satin, covered with gold or silver; fifty-four palles of the
same description;" a quantity of "reliquaries, vases and spoons,
censers, laces, silver and gold fringe, thirty-two pieces of silk,"
etc.  None of these fine things belong to him; they are the property
of citizen Mouet, his father.  This prudent parent, taking his word
for it, "deposited them for safe keeping in his son's house during the
month of June, 1792 (old style);" - could a good son refuse his father
such a slight favor? It is very certain that, in '93 and '94, during
the young man's municipal dictatorship, the elder did not pay the
Strasbourg Jew brokers too much, and that they did business in an
off-hand way.  By what right could a son and magistrate prevent his
father, a free individual, from looking after "his own affairs"
and buying according to trade principles, as cheap as he could?

If such are the profits on the sale of personal property, what must
they be on the sale of real estate? - It is on this traffic that the
fortunes of the clever terrorists are founded.  It accounts for the
"colossal wealth peaceably enjoyed," after Thermidor, of the well-
known "thieves" who, before Thermidor, were so many "little
Robespierres," each in his own canton, "the patriots " who, around
Orleans, "built palaces," who, "exclusives" at Valenciennes, "having
wasted both public and private funds, possess the houses and property
of emigrants, knocked down to them at a hundred times less than their
value."[135]  On this side, their outstretched fingers shamelessly
clutch all they can get hold of; for the obligation of each arrested
party to declare his name, quality and fortune, as it now is and was
before the Revolution, gives local cupidity a known, sure, direct and
palpable object.  - At Toulouse, says a prisoner,[136] "the details
and value of an object were taken down as if for a succession," while
the commissioners who drew up the statement, "our assassins,
proceeded, beforehand and almost under our eyes, to take their share,
disputing with each other on the choice and suitableness of each
object, comparing the cost of adjudication with the means of lessening
it, discussing the certain profits of selling again and of the
transfer, and consuming in advance the pickings arising from sales and
leases." - In Provence, where things are more advanced and corruption
is greater than elsewhere, where the purport and aims of the
Revolution were comprehended at the start, it is still worse.  Nowhere
did Jacobin rulers display their real character more openly, and
nowhere, from 1789 to 1799, was this character so well maintained.  At
Toulon, the demagogues in the year V., as in the year II., are[137]
"former workmen and clerks in the Arsenal who had become 'bosses' by
acting as informers and through terrorism, getting property for
nothing, or at an insignificant price, and plotting sales of national
possessions, petty traders from all quarters with stocks of goods
acquired in all sorts of ways, through robberies, through purchases of
stolen goods from servants and employees in the civil, war and navy
departments, and through abandoned or bought-up claims; in a word, men
who, having run away from other communes, pass their days in coffee-
houses and their nights in houses of ill-fame." - At Draguignan,
Brignolles, Vidauban, Fréjus, at Marseilles, after Thermidor, the
intermittent returns to Terrorism always restore the same quarries of
the justiciary and the police to office.[138] "Artisans, once useful,
but now tired of working, and whom the profession of paid clubbists,
idle guardians," and paid laborers "has totally demoralized,"
scoundrels in league with each other and making money out of whatever
they can lay their hands on, like thieves at a fair, habitually living
at the expense of the public, "bestowing the favors of the nation on
those who share their principles, harboring and aiding many who are
under the ban of the law and calling themselves model patriots,[139]
that is, in the pay of gambling hells and houses of prostitution." -
In the rural districts, the old bands "consisting of hordes of
homeless brigands" who worked so well during the anarchy of the
Constituent and Legislative assemblies, form anew during the anarchy
of the Directory; they make their appearance in the vicinity of Apt
"commencing with petty robberies and then, strong in the impunity and
title of sans-culottes, break into farm-houses, rob and massacre the
inmates, strip travelers, put to ransom all who happen to cross their
path, force open and pillage houses in the commune of Gorges, stop
women in the streets, tear off their rings and crosses," and attack
the hospital, sacking it from top to bottom, while the town and
military officers, just like them, allow them to go on.[140] - Judge
by this of their performances in the time of Robespierre, when the
vendors and administrators of the national possessions exercised
undisputed control.  Everywhere, at that time, in the departments of
Var, Bouches-du-Rhône, and Vaucluse, "a club of would-be patriots" had
long prepared the way for their exactions.  It had "paid appraisers
for depreciating whatever was put up for sale, and false names for
concealing real purchasers; "a person not of their clique, was
excluded from the auction-room; if he persisted in coming in they
would, at one time, put him under contribution for the privilege of
bidding," and, at another time, make him promise not to bid above the
price fixed by the league, while, to acquire the domain, they paid him
a bonus.  Consequently, "national property" was given away "for almost
nothing," the swindlers who acquired it never being without a
satisfactory warrant for this in their own eyes.  Into whose hands
could the property of anti-revolutionists better fall than into those
of patriots? According to Marat, the martyr apostle and canonised
saint of the Revolution, what is the object of the Revolution but to
give to the lowly the fortunes of the great?[141] In all national
sales everywhere, in guarding sequestrations, in all revolutionary
ransoms, taxes, loans and seizures, the same excellent argument
prevails; nowhere, in printed documents or in manuscripts, do I find
any revolutionary committee which is at once terrorist and honest.
Only, it is rare to find specific and individual details regarding all
the members of the same committee.  - Here, however, is one case,
where, owing to the lucky accident of an examination given in detail,
one can observe in one nest, every variety of the species and of its
appetites, the dozen or fifteen types of the Jacobin hornet, each
abstracting what suits him from whatever he lights on, each indulging
in his favorite sort of rapine.  - At Nantes, "Pinard, the great
purveyor of the Committee,[142] orders everything that each member
needs for his daily use to be carried to his house." - "Gallou takes
oil and brandy," and especially "several barrels from citizen
Bissonneau's house." - "Durassier makes domiciliary visits and exacts
contributions;" among others "he compels citizen Lemoine to pay
twenty-five hundred livres, to save him from imprisonment." - "Naud
affixes and removes seals in the houses of the incarcerated, makes
nocturnal visits to the dwellings of the accused and takes what suits
him." - "Grandmaison appropriates plate under sequestration, and
Bachelier plate given as a present." - "Joly superintends executions
and takes all he can find, plate, jewelry, precious objects." -
"Bolognié forces the return of a bond of twenty thousand livres
already paid to him." - Perrochaux demands of citoyenne Ollemard-Dudan
"fifty thousand livres, to prevent her imprisonment," and confiscates
for his own benefit sixty thousand livres worth of tobacco, in the
house of the widow Daigneau-Mallet, who, claiming it back, is led off
by him to prison under the pretext of interceding for her.  - Chaux
frightens off by terrorism his competitors at auction sales, has all
the small farms on the Baroissière domain knocked down to him, and
exclaims concerning a place which suits him: "I know how to get it!
I'll have the owner arrested.  He'll be very glad to let me have his
ground to get out of prison.' " - The collection is complete, and
gathered on a table, it offers specimens which can be found scattered
all over France.

VII.  The Armed Forces.

The Armed Force, the National Guard and the Gendarmerie.  - Its
purgation  and composition.  - The Revolutionary Armies in Paris and
in the departments.  - Quality of the recruits.  - Their employment.
- Their expeditions into the countryside and the towns.  - Their
exploits in the vicinity of Paris and Lyons.  - The company of
Maratists, the American Hussars and the German Legion at Nantes.  -
General character of the Revolutionary government and of the
administrative staff of the Reign of Terror.

The last manipulators of the system remain, the hands which seize, the
armed force which takes bodily hold of men and things.  - The first
who are employed for this purpose are the National Guard and the
ordinary gendarmerie.  Since 1790, these bodies are of course
constantly weeded out until only fanatics and robots are left;[143]
nevertheless, the weeding-out continues as the system develops itself.
At Strasbourg,[144] on Brumaire 14, the representatives have
dismissed, arrested and sent to Dijon the entire staff of the National
Guard to serve as hostages until peace is secured; three days
afterwards, considering that the cavalry of the town had been mounted
and equipped at its own expense, they deem it aristocratic, bourgeois,
and "suspect," and seize the horses and put the officers in arrest.  -
At Troyes, Rousselin, "National civil commissioner," dismisses, for
the same reason, and with not less dispatch, all of the gendarmes at
one stroke, except four, and "puts under requisition their horses,
fully equipped, also their arms, so as to at once mount well known and
tried sans-culottes." On principle, the poor sans-culottes, who are
true at heart and in dress, alone have the right to bear arms, and
should a bourgeois be on duty he must have only a pike, care being
taken to take it away from him the moment he finishes his rounds.[145]

But, alongside of the usual armed force, there is still another, much
better selected and more effective, the reserve gendarmerie, a
special, and, at the same time, movable and resident body, that is to
say, the "revolutionary army," which, after September 5, 1793, the
government had raised in Paris and in most of the large towns.  - That
of Paris, comprising six thousand men, with twelve hundred cannoneers,
sends detachments into the provinces - two thousand men to Lyons, and
two hundred to Troyes;[146] Ysabeau and Tallien have at Bordeaux a
corps of three thousand men ; Salicetti, Albitte and Gasparin, one of
two thousand men at Marseilles; Ysoré and Duquesnoy, one of one
thousand men at Lille; Javogues, one of twelve hundred at Montbrison.
Others, less numerous, ranging from six hundred down to two hundred
men, hold Moulins, Grenoble, Besançon, Belfort, Bourg, Dijon,
Strasbourg, Toulouse, Auch and Nantes.3147When, on March 27, 1794, the
Committee of Public Safety, threatened by Hébert, has them disbanded
for being Hébertists, in any of them are to remain at least as a
nucleus, under various forms and names, either as kept by the local
administration under the title of "paid guards,"[148] or as disbanded
soldiers, loitering about and doing nothing, getting themselves
assigned posts of rank in the National Guard of their town on account
of their exploits; in this way they keep themselves in service, which
is indispensable, for it is through these that the régime is
established and lasts.  "The revolutionary army,[149] say the orders
and decrees promulgated, "is intended to repress anti-revolutionaries,
to execute, whenever it is found necessary, revolutionary laws and
measures for public safety," that is to say, "to guard those who are
shut up, arrest 'suspects,' demolish chateaux, pull down belfries,
ransack vestries for gold and silver objects, seize fine horses and
carriages," and especially " to seek for private stores and
monopolies," in short, to exercise manual constraint and strike every
one on the spot with physical terror.  - We readily see what sort of
soldiers the revolutionary army is composed of.

Naturally, as it is recruited by voluntary enlistment, and all
candidates have passed the purifying scrutiny of the clubs, it
comprises none but ultra-Jacobins.  Naturally, the pay being forty
sous a day, it comprises none but the very lowest class.  Naturally,
as the work is as loathsome as it is atrocious, it comprises but few
others[150] than those out of employment and reduced to an enlistment
to get a living, "hairdressers without customers, lackeys without
places, vagabonds, wretches unable to earn a living by honest labor,"
"thick and hard hitters" who have acquired the habit of bullying,
knocking down and keeping honest folks under their pikes, a gang of
confirmed scoundrels making public brigandage a cloak for private
brigandage, inhabitants of the slums glad to bring down their former
superiors into the mud, and themselves take precedence and strut about
in order to prove by their arrogance and self-display that they, in
their turn, are princes.  - "Take a horse, the nation pays for
it!"[151] said the sans-culottes of Bordeaux to their comrades in the
street, who, "in a splendid procession," of three carriages, each
drawn by six horses, escorted by a body on horseback, behind, in
front, and each side, conducting Riouffe and two other "suspects" to
the Réole prison.  The commander of the squad who guards prisoners on
the way to Paris, and who "starves them along the road to speculate on
them," is an ex-cook of Agen, having become a gendarme; he makes them
travel forty leagues extra, "purposely to glorify himself," and "let
all Agen see that he has government money to spend, and that he can
put citizens in irons." Accordingly, in Agen, "he keeps constantly and
needlessly inspecting the vehicle," winking at the spectators, "more
triumphant than if he had made a dozen Austrians prisoners and brought
them along himself." At last, to show the crowd in the street the
importance of his capture, he summons two blacksmiths to come out and
rivet, on the legs of each prisoner, a cross-bar cannon-ball weighing
eighty pounds.[152] The more display these henchmen make of their
brutality, the greater they think themselves.  At Belfort, a patriot
of the club dies, and a civic interment takes place; a detachment of
the revolutionary army joins the procession; the men are armed with
axes; on reaching the cemetery, the better to celebrate the funeral,
"they cut down all the crosses (over the graves) and make a bonfire of
them, while the carmagnole ends this ever memorable day."[153] -
Sometimes the scene, theatrical and played by the light of flambeaux,
makes the actors think that they have performed an extraordinary and
meritorious action, "that they have saved the country."  "This very
night," writes the agent at Bordeaux,[154] nearly three thousand men
have been engaged in an important undertaking, with the members of the
Revolutionary Committee and of the municipality at the head of it.
They visited every wholesale dealer's store in town and in the
Faubourg des Chartrons, taking possession of their letter-books,
sealing up their desks, arresting the merchants and putting them in
the Seminiare.  .  .  .  Woe to the guilty ! " - If the prompt
confinement of an entire class of individuals is a fine thing for a
town, the seizure of a whole town itself is still more imposing.
Leaving Marseilles with a small army,[155] commanded by two sans-
culottes, they surround Martigne and enter it as if it were a mill.
The catch is superb; in this town of five thousand souls there are
only seventeen patriots; the rest are Federalists or Moderates.  Hence
a general disarmament and domiciliary visits.  The conquerors depart,
carrying off every able-bodied boy, "five hundred lads subject to the
conscription, and leave in the town a company of sans-culottes to
enforce obedience." It is certain that obedience will be maintained
and that the garrison, joined to the seventeen patriots, will do as
they like with their conquest.

In effect, all, both bodies and goods, are at their disposal, and they
consequently begin with the surrounding countryside, entering private
houses to get at their stores, also the farmhouses to have the grain
threshed, in order to verify the declarations of their owners and see
if these are correct: if the grain is not threshed out at once it will
be done summarily and confiscated, while the owner will be sentenced
to twelve months in irons; if the declaration is not correct, he is
condemned as a monopolist and punished with death.  Armed with this
order,[156] each band takes the field and gathers together not only
grain, but supplies of every description.  "That of Grenoble, the
agent writes,[157] does wonderfully; in one little commune alone, four
hundred measures of wheat, twelve hundred eggs, and six hundred pounds
of butter had been found.  All this was quickly on the way to
Grenoble." In the vicinity of Paris, the forerunners of the throng,
provided "with pitchforks and bayonets, rush to the farms, take oxen
out of their stalls, grab sheep and chickens, burn the barns, and sell
their booty to speculators."[158]  "Bacon, eggs, butter and chickens -
the peasants surrender whatever is demanded of them, and thenceforth
have nothing that they can take to market.  They curse the Republic
which has brought war and famine on them, and nevertheless they do
what they are told: on being addressed, 'Citizen peasant, I require of
you on peril of your head,' .  .  .  it is not possible to
refuse."[159] - Accordingly, they are only too glad to be let off so
cheaply.  On Brumaire 19, about seven o'clock in the evening, at
Tigery, near Corbeil, twenty-five men "with sabers and pistols in
their belts, most of them in the uniform of the National Guards and
calling themselves the revolutionary army," enter the house of Gibbon,
an old ploughman, seventy-one years of age, while fifty others guard
all egress from it, so that the expedition may not be interfered with.
Turlot, captain, and aid-de-camp to General Henriot, wants to know
where the master of the house is.  - "In his bed," is the reply.  -
"Wake him up." - The old man rises.  - Give up your arms." - His wife
hands over a fowling-piece, the only arm on the premises.  The band
immediately falls on the poor man, "strikes him down, ties his hands,
and puts a sack over his head," and the same thing is done to his wife
and to eight male and two female servants.  "Now, give us the keys of
your closets;" they want to be sure that there are no fleur-de-lys or
other illegal articles.  They search the old man's pockets, take his
keys, and, to dispatch business, break into the chests and seize or
carry off all the plate, "twenty-six table-dishes, three soup-ladles,
three goblets, two snuff-boxes, forty counters, two watches, another
gold watch and a gold cross." "We will draw up a procès-verbal of all
this at our leisure in Meaux.  Now, where's your silver? If you don't
say where it is, the guillotine is outside and I will be your
executioner." The old man yields and merely requests to be untied.
But it is better to keep him bound, "so as to make him 'sing.' " They
carry him into the kitchen and "put his feet into a heated brazier."
He shouts with pain, and indicates another chest which they break open
and then carry off what they find there, "seventy-two francs in coin
and five or six thousand livres in assignats, which Gibbon had just
received for the requisitions made on him for corn." Next, they break
open the cellar doors, set a cask of vinegar running, carry wine
upstairs, eat the family meal, get drunk and, at last, clear out,
leaving Gibbon with his feet burnt, and garroted, as well as the other
eleven members of his household, quite certain that there will be no
pursuit.[160] - In the towns, especially in federalist districts,
however, these robberies are complicated with other assaults.  At
Lyons, whilst the regular troops are lodged in barracks, the
revolutionary army is billeted on the householders, two thousand vile,
sanguinary blackguards from Paris, and whom their general, Ronsin
himself, calls "scoundrels and brigands," alleging, in excuse for
this, that "honest folks cannot be found for such business." How they
treat their host, his wife and his daughters may be imagined;
contemporaries glide over these occurrences and, through decency or
disgust, avoid giving details.[161] Some simply use brutal force;
others get rid of a troublesome husband by the guillotine; in the most
exceptional cases they bring their wenches along with them, while the
housekeeper has to arouse herself at one o'clock at night and light a
fire for the officer who comes in with the jolly company.  - And yet,
there are others still worse, for the worst attract each other.  We
have seen the revolutionary committee at Nantes, also the
representative on mission in the same city; nowhere did the
revolutionary Sabbat rage so furiously, and nowhere was there such a
traffic in human lives.  With such band-leaders as Carrier and his
tools on the Committee, one may be sure that the instrumentalists will
be worthy.

Accordingly, several members of the Committee themselves oversee
executions and lend a hand in the massacres.  - One of these, Goullin,
a creole from St.  Domingo, sensual and nervous, accustomed to
treating a Negro as an animal and a Frenchman as a white Negro, a
Septembriseur on principle, chief instigator and director of the
"drownings," goes in person to empty the prison of Bouffay, and,
verifying that death, the hospital or releases, had removed the
imprisoned for him, adds, of his own authority, fifteen names, taken
haphazard, to reach his figures.  - Joly, a commissioner on the
Committee, very expert in the art of garroting, ties the hands of
prisoners together two and two and conducts them to the river.[162] -
Grand-maison, another member of the Committee, a former dancing-
master, convicted of two murders and pardoned before the Revolution,
strikes down with his saber the imploring hands stretched out to him
over the planks of the lighter.[163] - Pinard, another Committee-
commissioner, ransoms, steals off into the country and himself kills,
through preference, women and children.[164] Naturally, the three
bands which operate along with them, or under their orders, comprise
only men of their species.  In the first one, called the Marat
company, each of the sixty members swears, on joining it, to adopt
Marat's principles and carry out Marat's doctrine.  Goullin,[165] one
of the founders, demands in relation to each member, "Isn't there some
one still more rascally? For we must have that sort to bring the
aristocrats to reason!"[166]  After Frimaire 5 "the Maratists" boast
of their arms being "tired out" with striking prisoners with the flat
of their sabers to make them march to the Loire,[167] and we see that,
notwithstanding this fatigue, the business suited them, as their
officers tried to influence Carrier to be detailed on the "drowning"
service and because it was lucrative.  The men and women sentenced to
death, were first stripped of their clothes down to the shirt, and
even the shift; it would be a pity to let valuable objects go to the
bottom with their owners, and therefore the drowners divide these
amongst themselves; a wardrobe in the house of the adjutant Richard is
found full of jewelry and watches.[168]  This company of sixty must
have made handsome profits out of the four or five thousand drowned.-
The second band, called "the American Hussars," and who operated in
the outskirts, was composed of blacks and mulattos, numerous enough in
this town of privateers.  It is their business to shoot women, whom
they first violate; "they are our slaves," they say; "we have won them
by the sweat of our brows." "Those who have the misfortune to be
spared, become in their hands mad in a couple of days; in any event
they are re-arrested shortly afterwards and shot.  - The last band,
which is styled "The German Legion," is formed out of German deserters
and mercenaries speaking little or no French.  They are employed by
the Military Commission to dispatch the Vendeans picked up along the
highways, and who are usually shot in groups of twenty five.  "I
came," says an eye-witness,[169] "to a sort of gorge where there was a
semi-circular quarry; there, I noticed the corpses of seventy-five
women naked and lying on their backs." The victims of that day
consisted of girls from sixteen to eighteen years of age.  One of them
says to her conductor, "I am sure you are taking us to die," and the
German replies in his broken jargon, probably with a coarse laugh,"
No, it is for a change of air.   They are placed in a row in front of
the bodies of the previous day and shot.  Those who do not fall, see
the guns reloaded; these are again shot and the wounded dispatched
with the butt ends of the muskets.  Some of the Germans then rifle the
bodies, while others strip them and "place them on their backs." - To
find workmen for this task, it is necessary to descend, not only to
the lowest wretches in France but, again, to the brutes of a foreign
race and tongue, and yet lower still, to an inferior race degraded by
slavery and perverted by license.

Such, from the top to the bottom of the ladder, at every stage of
authority and obedience, is the ruling staff of the revolutionary
government.[170] Through its recruits and its work, through its morals
and modes of proceeding, it evokes the almost forgotten image of its
predecessors, for there is an image of it in the period from the
fourteenth to the seventeenth century.  At that time also, society was
frequently overcome and ravaged by barbarians; dangerous nomads,
malevolent outcasts, bandits turned into soldiers suddenly pounced
down on an industrious and peaceful population.  Such was the case in
France with the "Routiers" and the "Tard-venus," at Rome with the army
of the Constable of Bourbon, in Flanders with the bands of the Duke of
Alba and the Duke of Parma, in Westphalia and in Alsace, with
Wallenstein's veterans, and those of Bernard of Saxe-Weimar.  They
lived upon a town or province for six months, fifteen months, two
years, until the town or province was exhausted.  They alone were
armed, master of the inhabitants, using and abusing things and persons
according to their caprices.  But they were declared bandits, calling
themselves scorchers, (ecorcheurs) riders and adventurers, and not
pretending to be humanitarian philosophers.  Moreover, beyond an
immediate and personal enjoyment, they demanded nothing; they employed
brutal force only to satiate their greed, their cruelty, their lust.
- The latter add to private appetites a far greater devastation, the
systematic and gratuitous ravages enforced upon them by the
superficial theory with which they are imbued.

________________________________________________________________________

Notes:

[1] "The Revolution," II., pp.  298-304, and p.  351.

[2] "The Revolution," II., pp.298-304, and p.  351.  Should the
foregoing testimony be deemed insufficient, the following, by those
foreigners who had good opportunities for judging, may be added:
(Gouverneur Morris, letter of December 3, 1794.) "The French are
plunged into an abyss of poverty and slavery, a slavery all the more
degrading because the men who have plunged them into it merit the
utmost contempt."- Meissner, "Voyage à Paris," (at the end of 1795,)
p.  160.  "The (revolutionary) army and the revolutionary committees
were really associations organized by crime for committing every
species of injustice, murder, rapine, and brigandage with impunity.
The government had deprived all men of any talent or integrity of
their places and given these to its creatures, that is to say, to the
dregs of humanity." - Baron Brinckmann, Chargé d'Affaires from Sweden.
(Letter of July 11, 1799.) "I do not believe that the different
classes of society in France are more corrupt than elsewhere; but I
trust that no people may ever be ruled by as imbecile and cruel
scoundrels as those that have ruled France since the advent of its new
state of freedom.  .  .  The dregs of the people, stimulated from
above by sudden and violent excitement, have everywhere brought to the
surface the scum of immorality."

[3] Fleury, "Babeuf," 139, 150.  - Granier de Cassagnac, "Histoire du
Directoire," II., 24-170.  - (Trial of Babeuf, passim.) The above
quotations are from documents seized in Babeuf's house, also from
affidavits made by witnesses, and especially by captain Grizel.

[4] Moniteur, session of September 5, 1793.  "Since our virtue, our
moderation, our philosophic ideas, are of no use to us, let us be
brigands for the good of the people; let us be brigands!"

[5] Babeuf, "Le Tribun du Peuple," No.40.  Apologia for the men of
September, "who have only been the priests, the sacrificers of a just
immolation for public security.  If anything is to be regretted it is
that a larger and more general Second of September did not sweep away
all starvers and all despoilers."

[6] Granier de Cassagnac, II., 90.  (Deposition of Grisel.) Rossignol
said, "That snuff-box is all I have left, here it is so that I may
exist." - "Massard owned a pair of boots which he could not collect
because he had no money with which to pay the shoemaker."

[7] Archives Nationales, Cf.  31167.  (Report of Robin, Nivôse 9.):
"The women always had a deliberative voice in the popular assemblies
of the Pantheon section," and in all the other clubs they attended the
meetings.

[8] Moniteur, XIX., 103.  (Meeting of the Jacobin club, Dec.  28,
1793.) Dubois-Crancé introduces the following question to each member
who is subjected to the weeding-out vote: "What have you done that
would get you hung in case of a counter revolution?"

[9] Ibid., XVII., 410.  (Speech by Maribon-Montaut, Jacobin club,
Brumaire 21, year II.)

[10] Dauban, "Paris in 1794," 142.  (Police report of Ventôse 13, year
II.)

[11] Morellet, " Mémoires," II.  449.

[12] Dauban, ib.,, 35.  (Note drawn up in January, 1794, probably by
the physician Quêvremont de Lamotte.) - Ibid., 82.  - Cf.  Morellet,
II., 434-470.  (Details on the issue of certificates of civism, in
September, 1793.)

[13] Archives Nationales, F.7, 31167.  (Report by Latour-Lamontagne,
Ventôse 1, year II.): " It is giving these associations too much
influence; it is destroying the jurisdiction of the general assemblies
(of the section.) We find accordingly, that these are being deserted
and that the plotters and intriguers succeed in making popular clubs
the centers of public business in order to control affairs more
easily."

[14] Dauban, ibid., 203.  (Report by Bacon-Tacon, Ventose 19.) "In the
general assembly of the Maison Commune section all citizens of any
rank in the companies have been weeded out.  The slightest stain of
incivism, the slightest negligence in the service, caused their
rejection.  Out of twenty-five who passed censorship-nineteen at least
were rejected.  .  .  .Most of them due to their trade such as eating-
house keeper, shoe-maker, cook, carpenter, tailor etc."

[15] Ibid., 141.  (Report by Charmont, Ventôse 12.) - Ibid, 140.
"There is only one way, it is said at the Café des Grands Hommes, on
the boulevard, to keep from being arrested, and that is to scheme for
admission into the civil and revolutionary committees when there
happens to be a vacancy.  Before salaries were attached to these
places nobody wanted them; since that, there are disputes as to who
shall be appointed."

[16] Ibid., 307.  (Report of Germinal 7.)

[17] Wallon, " Histoire du Tribunal Revolutionaire," IV., 129.

[18] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 46.  (Act of the Committee of
Public Safety, Prairial 15.): "Citizens Pillon, Gouste and Né, members
of the Revolutionary committee of the Marat section, are removed.
Their duties will be performed by citizens Martin, Majon and Mirel.
Mauvielle, rue de la Liberté, No.  32, is appointed on the said
Revolutionary Committee to complete it, as it was only composed of
eleven members." - And other similar acts.

[19] Duverger, decree of Frimaire 14, year II.  "The application of
revolutionary laws and measures of general security and public safety
is confided to the municipalities and revolutionary committees." See,
in chapter II., the extent of the domain thus defined.  It embraces
nearly everything.  It suffices to run through the registers of a few
of the revolutionary committees, to verify this enormous power and see
how they interfere in every detail of individual life

[20] Archives Nationales, F.7, 31167.  (Report, Nivôse 1, year II., by
Leharival.)

[21] Dauban, "Paris en 1794," 307.  (Report of March 29, 1794.) It
here relates to the "Piques" Section, Place Vendome.

[22] Dauban, ib., 308.  (Note found among Danton's papers and probably
written by the physician, Quevremont de Lamotte.)

[23] Dauban, ib., 125.  (Report of Bérard, Ventôse 10.) In the words
of a woman belonging to the Bonne-Novelle section: "My husband has
been in prison four months.  And what for? He was one of the first at
the Bastille; he has always refused places so that the good sans-
culottes might have them, and, if he has made enemies, it was because
he was unwilling to see these filled by ignoramuses or new-comers,
who, vociferating and apparently thirsting for blood, have created a
barrier of partisans around them."

[24] Dauban, ibid., 307.  (Report of March 29, 1794.)

[25] Ibid., 150.  (Report of Ventôse 14.) - Archives Nationales, F.7,
31167.  (Reports of Nivôse 9 and 25.): "A great many citizens are
found in the sections who are called out after the meeting, to get
forty sous.  I notice that most of them are masons, and even a few
coach drivers belonging to the nation, who can do without the nation's
indemnity, which merely serves them for drink to make them very
noisy." - " The people complain, because the persons to whom the forty
sous are given, to attend the section assemblies do nothing all day,
being able to work at different trades....  and they relay upon these
forty sous."

[26] Dauban, ibid., 312.  (Note by Quevremont.) - Moniteur, XVIII.,
568, (Meeting of the commune, Frimaire 11, year II.): "The Beaurepaire
section advertises that wishing to put a stop to the cupidity of the
wine-dealers of the arrondissement, it has put seals on all their
cellars."

[27] Dauban, ibid., 345.  (Order of the day by Henriot, Floreal 9.)

[28] Mallet-Dupan, II., 56.  (March, 1794.)

[29] Buchez et Roux, XXVII., 10.  (Speech by Barbaroux, May 14, 1793.)
- Report on the papers found in Robespierre's apartment by Courtois,
285.  (Letter by Collot d'Herbois Frimaire 3, year II., demanding that
Paris Jacobins be sent to him at Lyons.) " If I could have asked for
our old ones I should have done.  .  .  but they are necessary at
Paris, almost all of them having been made mayors."

[30] Meissner, "Voyage à Paris," (at the end of 1795,) 160.  "Persons
who can neither read nor write obtain the places of accountants of
more or less importance."? Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.
324.  (Denunciations of Pio to the club, against his colleagues.) -
Dauban, ibid., 35.  (Note by Quevremont, Jan., 1794.): "The honest man
who knows how to work cannot get into the ministerial bureaux,
especially those of the War and Navy departments, as well as those of
the Commune and of the Departments, without having a lump in his
throat.  - Offices are mostly filled by creatures of the Commune who
very often have neither talent nor integrity.  Again, the
denunciations, always welcomed, however frivolous and baseless they
may be, turn everything upside down.

[31] Moniteur, XXIV., 397 (Speech of Dubois-Crancé in the Convention
Floréal 16, year III.) - Archives Nationales, F.7, 31167.  (Report by
Rolin, Nivôse 7, year II.) "The same complaints are heard against the
civil Commissioners of the section, most of whom are unintelligent,
not even knowing how to read."

[32] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  1411.  (August, 1793.)
"Plan adopted" for the organization of the Police, "excepting
executive modifications." In fact, some months later, the number of
claqueurs, male and female, is much greater, and finally reaches a
thousand.  (Beaulieu, "Essais," V., l10.) - The same plan comprehends
fifteen agents at two thousand four hundred francs, "selected from the
frequenters of the clubs," to revise the daily morning lists; thirty
at one thousand francs, for watching popular clubs, and ninety to
twelve hundred francs for watching the section assemblies.

[33] Archives Nationales, F.7, 4436.  (Letter of Bouchotte, Minister
of war, Prairial 5, year II.) "The appointment of Ronsin, as well as
of all his staff, again excited public opinion.  The Committee, to
assure itself, sent the list to the Jacobin club, where they were
accepted." - Ibid., AF.,II., 58.  " Paris, Brumaire II, year II., club
of the Friends of Liberty and Equality, in session at the former
Jacobin club, rue St.  Honoré.  List of the citizens who are to set
out for Lyons and act as national commissioners.  (Here follow their
names.) All the citizens designated have undergone the inspection of
the said club, at its meeting this day." (Here follow the signatures
of the President and three secretaries.) - "Journal des Débats et
Correspondence de la Société des Jacobins, No.543, 5th day of the 3rd
month of the year II.  - In relation to the formation of a new Central
club, "Terrasson is of opinion that this club may become liberticide,
and demands a committee to examine into it and secure its extinction.
The committee demanded by Terrasson is appointed." - It is evident
that they hold on energetically to this monopoly.  - Cf.  Moniteur,
XIX., 637.  (Ventôse 13.) Motion adopted in the Jacobin club, obliging
the ministers to turn out of office any individual excluded from the
club.

[34] Dauban, ibid., 307.  (Report of Germinal 9.)

[35] Moniteur, XXII.  353.  (Session of Brumaire 20, year III.
Reclamation made by M. Bélanger at the bar of the Convention.)

[36] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 40.  (Acts passed by the Committee
of Public Safety at the dates indicated.) Beaulieu, "Essais," v., 200.
(Ibid.) The registers of the Committee of Public Safety contain a
number of similar gratuities paid to provincial clubs and patriots,
for instance, AF., II.  58, (Brumaire 8), fifty thousand francs to
Laplanche, and, (Brumaire 9), fifty thousand francs to Couthon, "to
maintain public spirit in Calvados, to revive public spirit in Lyons,
to aid, as required, the less successful patriots who zealously devote
their time to the service of their country."

[37] Dauban, ibid., 171, (report of Ventôse 17), and 243, (report of
Ventôse 25), on the civil-committees and revolutionary committees, who
order meat served to them before serving it to the sick, and who
likewise serve the good friends of their wives.? Ibid., 146.  (Report
of Ventôse 10.).  .  .  Archives Nationales F.7, 2475.  (Register of
the deliberations of the revolutionary committee of the Piques
sections, Brumaire 27, year II.) "The Committee orders that the two-
horse cab belonging to Lemarche be henceforth at the service of the
section and of the Committee when measures of security are concerned."
In this register, and others of the same series, we clearly see the
inside of a committee and its vast despotism.  Style and orthography,
with almost all, are of the same low order.

[38] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  1411.  (Report of Aug.21
and 22, 1793.) "General Henriot sent me several .  .  .  .  who made
use of the authority of the Committee of Public Safety and General
Security, as well as of that which he delegated to me, to make
domiciliary visits at the houses of individuals who were not assured
patriots; but that did not warrant their receiving money and even
abstracting it."

[39] Dauban, ibid., 36 and 48.  (Case of the Notary, Brichard.)

[40] Cf.  "The Revolution," II., 302, 303.  - Mercier, "Paris pendant
la Revolution," I., 151.  - Moniteur, XVIII., 660.  (Session of
Frimaire 24, speech by Lecomtre in the Convention.) - On robberies and
the bribes paid, see, among other documents, "Mémoires sur les
Prisons," I., 290.  (Eighty thousand francs of bribes given to the
head of the police force by Perisial, keeper of an eating-house, for
the privilege of feeding prisoners in St.  Lazare.)

[41] Buchez et Roux, XXXV., 77.  (Trial of Fouquier-Tinville.)
Testimony of Robillard: "Another day, in the general assembly, he
struck a citizen with his saber."

[42] Buchez et Roux, XXXV., 407.  (Lists in Robespierre's
handwriting.)

[43] Miot de Melito, " Mémoires," I., 46-51.-Buchot is not the only
one of his species in the ministry of Foreign Affairs.  In the
archives of this ministry, vol.  324, may be found the sayings and
doings of a certain Pio, an Italian refugee who slipped into the
place, simulating poverty, and displaying patriotism, and who
denounces his chief and colleagues.-The ex-notary Pigeot, condemned to
twenty years in irons and put in the pillory, Frimaire 9, year III.,
will come to the surface; he is encountered under the Directory as
introducer of ambassadors.-Concerning one of the envoys of the
Directory to Switzerland, here is a note b~ Mallet-Dupan.  ("Anecdotes
manuscrites," October, 1797.) " The Directonal ambassador, who has
come to exact from the Swiss the expulsion of the body-guard, is named
Mingot, of Belfort, a relation of Reubell's, former body-guard to M.
le Comte d'Artois.-He came to Zurich with a prostitute, a seamstress
of Zurich, established in Berne.  He was living with her at the
expense of the Zurich government.  Having invited the family of this
creature, that is to say a common horse-driver with his wife and some
other persons, to dinner, they drank and committed such excesses that
the driver's wife, who was big with child, gave birth to it in the
midst of the banquet.  This creature gave Mingot a disease which has
laid him up at Basle."

[44] "The Revolution," II., 338, 348, 354.

[45] Martel, "Types Révolutionnaires," 136-144.- The Minister of War
appoints Henriot brigadier-general, July 3, 1793, and major-general on
the 19th of September, and says in a postscript, "Please communicate
your service record to me," unknown in the ministry because they were
of no account.  - On the orgies at Choisy-sur-Seine, V.  (Archives,
W2, 500-501), see investigation of Thermidor 18 and 19, year II., made
at Boisy-sur-Seine by Blache, agent of the committee of General
Security.  Boulanger, brigadier-general, and Henriot's first
lieutenant, was an ex-companion jeweller.

[46] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  1411.  Orders of the day
by Henriot, September 16, Vendémiaire 29, year II., and Brumaire 19,
year II.  Many of these orders of the day are published in Dauban,
("Paris en 1794"), p.  33.  "Let our enemies pile up their property,
build houses and palaces, let them have them, what do we care, we
republicans, we do not want them! All we need to shelter us is a
cabin, and as for wealth, simply the habits, the virtues and the love
of our country.  Headquarters, etc." - P.  43: "Yesterday evening a
fire broke out in the Grand Augustins.  .  .  .  Everybody worked at
it and it was put out in a very short time.  Under the ancient regime
the fire would have lasted for days.  Under the system of freemen the
fire lasted only an hour.  What a difference! .  .  Headquarters, etc

[47] Wallon, "Histoire du Tribunal Révolutionnaire de Paris," V.252,
420.  (Names and qualifications of the members of the Commune of
Paris, guillotined Thermidor 10 and 11.) The professions and
qualifications of some of its members are given in Lymery's
Biographical Dictionary, in Morellet's Memoirs and in Arnault's
Souvenirs.  ??Moniteur?? XVI., 719.  (Verdicts of the Revolutionary
Tribunal, Fructidor 15, year II.) Forty-three members of the civil or
revolutionary committees, sectional commissioners, officers of the
National Guard and of the cannoneers, signed the list of the council-
general of the commune as present on the 9th of Thermidor and are put
on trial as Robespierre's adherents.  But they promptly withdrew their
signatures, all being acquitted except one.  They are leaders in the
Jacobin quarter and are of the same sort arid condition as their
brethren of the Hôtel-de-ville.  One only, an ex-collector of rentes,
may have had an education; the rest are carpenters, floor-tilers,
shoemakers, tailors, wine-dealers, eating-house keepers, cartmen,
bakers, hair-dressers, and joiners.  Among them we find one ex-stone-
cutter, one ex-office runner, one ex-domestic and two sons of Samson
the executioner.

[48] Morellet, "Mémoires," I., 436-472.

[49] On the ascendancy of the talkers of this class see Dauban ("Paris
en 1794," pp.  118-143).  Details on an all-powerful clothes-dealer in
the Lombards Section.  If we may believe the female citizens of the
Assembly "he said everywhere that whoever was disagreeable to him
should be turned out of the popular club." (Ventôse 13, year II.)

[50] Arnault, "Souvenirs d'un Sexagénaire," III., 111.  Details on
another member of the commune, Bergot, ex-employee at the Halle-aux-
Cuirs and police administrator, may be found in "Mémoires des
Prisons," I., 232, 239, 246, 289, 290.  Nobody treated the prisoners
more brutally, who protested against the foul food served out to them,
than he.  "It is too good for bastards who are going to be
guillotined.".  .  .  .  "He got drunk with the turnkeys and with the
commissioners themselves.  One day he staggered in walking, and spoke
only in hiccoughs: he would go in that condition.  The house-guard
refused to recognize him; he was arrested" and the concierge had to
repeat her declarations to make the officer of the post "give up the
hog."

[51] "Mémoires sur les Prisons," I., 211.  (" Tableau Historique de
St.  Lazare.") The narrator is put into prison in the rue de Sèvres in
October, 1793.  - II., 186.  ("An historical account of the jail in
the rue de Sèvres.") The narrator was confined there during the last
months of the Reign of Terror.

[52] A game of chance.

[53] "Un Séjour en France de 1792 à 1795," 281.  "We had an
appointment in the afternoon with a person employed by the committee
on National Domains; he was to help my friend with her claims.  This
man was originally a valet to the Marquise's brother; on the outbreak
of the Revolution he set up a shop, failed and became a rabid Jacobin,
and, at last, member of a revolutionary committee.  As such, he found
a way .  .  .  .  to intimidate his creditors and obtain two
discharges of his indebtedness without taking the least trouble to pay
his debts." .  .  .  .  "I know an old lady who was kept in prison
three months for having demanded from one of these patriots three
hundred livres which he owed her." (June 3, 1795.) "I have generally
noticed that the republicans are either of the kind I have just
indicated, coffee-house waiters, jockeys, gamblers, bankrupts, and low
scribblers, or manual laborers more earnest in their principles, more
ignorant and more brutal, all spending what they have earned in vulgar
indulgence."

[54] Schmidt, "Tableaux Historiques de la Revolution Française," II.,
248, 249.  (Agent's reports, Frimaire 8, year 111.) "The prosecution
of Carrier is approved by the public, likewise the condemnation of the
former revolutionary committee called the "BonnetRouge." Ten of its
members are condemned to twenty years in irons.  The public is
overjoyed." - Ibid., (Frimaire 9), "The people rushed in crowds to the
square of the old commune building to see the members of the former
revolutionary committee of the Bonnet-Rouge sections, who remained
seated on the bench until six o'clock, in the light of flambeaux.
They had to put up with many reproaches and much humiliation." - "Un
Sejour en France," 286, (June 6, 1795).  "I have just been interrupted
by a loud noise and cries under my window; I heard the names Scipio
and Solon distinctly pronounced in a jeering and insulting tone of
voice.  I sent Angelique to see what was the matter and she tells me
that it is a crowd of children following a shoemaker of the
neighborhood who was member of a revolutionary committee.  .  .  and
had called himself Scipio Solon.  As he had been caught in several
efforts at stealing he could no longer leave his shop without being
reviled for his robberies and hooted at under his Greek and Roman
names."

[55] Barère, "Mémoires," II., 324.

[56] Montieur, XXII., 742.  (Report by Cambon, Frimaire 6, year II.)
??Ibid., 22.  - Report by Lindet, September 20, 1794): " The land and
navy forces, war and other services, deprive agricultural pursuits and
other professions of more than one million five hundred thousand
citizens.  It would cost the Republic less to support six million men
in all the communes." - "Le Departement des Affaires étrangères," by
Fr.  Masson, 382.  (According to "Paris à la fin du dix-huitieme
siecle," by Pujoulx, year IX.): "At Paris alone there are more than
thirty thousand (government) clerks; six thousand at the most do the
necessary writing; the rest cut away quills, consume ink and blacken
paper.  In old times, there were too many clerks in the bureaux
relatively to the work; now, there are three times as many, and there
are some who think that there are not enough."

[57] "Souvenirs de M. Hua," a parliamentary advocate, p.96.  (A very
accurate picture of the small town Coucy-le-Chateau, in Aisne, from
1792 to 1794.) - "Archives des Affaires étrangères," vol.334.  (Letter
of the agents, Thionville, Ventôse 24, year II.) The district of
Thionville is very patriotic, submits to the maximum and requisitions,
but not to the laws prohibiting outside worship and religious
assemblies.  "The apostles of Reason preached in vain to the people,
telling them that, up to this time, they had been deceived and that
now was the time to throw off the yoke of prejudice: 'we are willing
to believe that, thus far, we have been deceived, but who will
guarantee us that you will not deceive us in your turn?'"

[58] Lagros: " La Révolution telle qu'elle est." (Unpublished
correspondence of the committee of Public Safety, I., 366.  Letter of
Prieur de la Marne.) " In general, the towns are patriotic; but the
rural districts are a hundred leagues removed from the Revolution.  .
.  .  Great efforts will be necessary to bring them up to the level of
the Revolution."

[59] According to the statistics of 1866 (published in 1869) a
district of one thousand square kilometres contains on an average,
thirty-three communes above five hundred souls, twenty-three from five
hundred to one thousand, seventeen bourgs and small towns from one
thousand to five thousand, and one average town, or very large one,
about five thousand.  Taking into account the changes that have taken
place in seventy years, one may judge from these figures of the
distribution of the population in 1793.  This distribution explains
why, instead of forty-five thousand revolutionary committees, there
were only twenty-one thousand five hundred.

[60] "Souvenirs des M. Hua," 179.  "This country (Coucy-le-Chateau)
protected by its bad roads and still more by its nullity, belonged to
that small number in which the revolutionary turmoil was least felt."

[61] Among other documents of use in composing this picture I must
cite, as first in importance, the five files containing all the
documents referring to the mission of the representative Albert, in
Aisne and Marne.  (Ventôse and Germinal, year III.) Nowhere do we find
more precise details of the sentiments of the peasant, of the common
laborer and of the lower bourgeois from 1792 to 1795.  (Archives
Nationales, D.  §§ 2 to 5.)

[62] Daubari, "La Demagogie en 1793," XII.  (The expression of an old
peasant, near Saint-Émilion, to M. Vatel engaged in collecting
information on the last days of Petion, Guadet and Buzot.)

[63] Archives Nationales, D.  § I., 5.  (Petition of Claude Defert,
miller, and national agent of Turgy.) Numbers of mayors, municipal
officers, national agents, administrators and notables of districts
and departments solicit successors, and Albert compels many of them to
remain in office.  - (Joint letter of the entire municipality of
Landreville; letter of Charles, stone-cutter, mayor of Trannes; Claude
Defert, miller, national agent of Turgy; of Elegny, meat-dealer; of a
wine-grower; municipal official at Merrex, etc.) The latter writes:
"The Republic is great and generous; it does not desire that its
children should ruin themselves in attending to its affairs; on the
contrary, its object is to give salaried (emolumentaires) places to
those who have nothing to live on.  - Another, Mageure, appointed
mayor of Bar-sur-Seine writes, Pluviôse 29, year III.: "I learned
yesterday that some persons of this community would like to procure
for me the insidious gift of the mayoralty," and he begs Albert to
turn aside this cup.

[64] "Souvenirs de M. Hua," 178-205.  "M. P...  , mayor of Crépy-au-
Mont, knew how to restrain some low fellows who would have been only
too glad to revolutionize his village.  .  .  .  And yet he was a
republican.  .  .  .  One day, speaking of the revolutionary system,
he said: 'They always say that it will not hold on; meanwhile, it
sticks like lice.' " - "A general assembly of the inhabitants of Coucy
and its outskirts was held, in which everybody was obliged to undergo
an examination, stating his name, residence, birth-place, present
occupation, and what he had done during the Revolution." Hua avoids
telling that he had been a representative in the Legislative Assembly,
a recognized fact in the neighborhood: "Not a voice was raised to
compromise me." - Ibid., 183.  (Reply of the Coucy Revolutionary
Committee to that of Meaux.)

[65] "Frochot," by Louis Passy, 175.  (Letter of Pajot, member of the
Revolutionary committee of Troyes, Vendémiaire, year III.) - Archives
Nationales, F.7, 4421.  (Register of the Revolutionary committee of
Troyes.) Brumaire 27, year II.  Incarceration of various suspects,
among others of "Lerouge, former lawyer, under suspicion of having
constantly and obstinately refused revolutionary offices." Also, a
person named Corps, for "having refused the presidency of the district
tribunal at the time of its organization, under the pretext of
consulting the Chambre des Comptes; also for being the friend of
suspects, and for having accepted office only after the Revolution had
assumed an imposing character."

[66] Marcelin Boudet, "Les conventionnels d'Auvergne," 161.
(Justification of Etienne Bonarmé, the last months of 1794.)

[67] Pans, "Histoire de Joseph Lebon," II., 92.  (Declaration by
Guérard, lawyer, appointed judge at Cambrai, by the Cambrai
Revolutionary committee.) - Ibid., 54.  (Declaration by Lemerre,
appointed juryman without his knowledge, in the Cambrai court.) "What
was my surprise, I, who never was on a jury in my life! The summons
was brought to me at a quarter to eleven (à onze heur moin un car -
specimen of the orthography) and I had to go at eleven without having
time to say good-by to my family."

[68] Report by Courtois on the papers found in Robespierre's domicile,
370.  (Letter of Maignet to Payan, administrator of the department of
Drôme, Germinal 20, year II.) "You know the dearth of subjects here .
.  .       Give me the names of a dozen outspoken republicans .  .  .
.  If you cannot find them in this department (Vaucluse) hunt for them
either in the Drôme or the Isère, or in any other.  I should like
those adapted to a revolutionary tribunal.  I should even like, in
case of necessity, to have some that are qualified to act as national
agents."

[69] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vols.  322 to 334, and 1409 to
1411.  - These agents reside in Nîmes, Marseilles, Toulouse, Tarbes,
Bordeaux, Auch, Rochefort, Brest, Bergues, Givet, Metz, Thionville,
Strasbourg, Colmar, Belfort and Grenoble, and often betake themselves
to towns in the vicinity.  - The fullest reports are those of Chepy,
at Grenoble, whose correspondence is worthy of publication; although
an ultra Jacobin, he was brought before the revolutionary Tribunal as
a moderate, in Ventôse, year II.  Having survived (the Revolution) he
became under the Empire a general commissary of Police at Brest.
Almost all of them are veritable Jacobins, absolutist at bottom, and
they became excellent despotic tools.

[70] Buchez et Roux, XXX., 425.  - Twenty-four commissioners, drawn by
lot from the Jacobins of Paris, are associated with Collot d'Herbois.
One of them, Marino, becomes president of the temporary Committee of
Surveillance, at Lyons.  Another, Parrien, is made president of the
Revolutionary Committee.  - Archives Nationales, AF., II., 59.
(Deliberations in the Paris Jacobin club, appointing three of their
number to go to Tonnerre and request the Committee of Public Safety
"to give them the necessary power, to use it as circumstances may
require, for the best good of the Republic." Frimaire 6, year II.) -
Order of the Committee of Public Safety, allowing two thousand francs
to the said parties for their traveling expenses." - Archives des
Affaires Étrangères, vol.  333.  The agents sent to Marseilles affix
their signatures, "sans-culottes, of Paris," and one of them, Brutus,
becomes president of the Marseilles revolutionary tribunal.

[71] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 49.  Papers relating to the
revolutionary tax of Belfort, giving all the amounts and names.
(Brumaire 30, year II.) Here is the formula: "citizen X.  .  .  (male
or female) will pay in one hour the sum of - - , under penalty of
being considered suspect and treated as such." - "Recueil des Pièces
Authentiques concernant la Révolution à Strasbourg," I., 128, 187.
(Expressions of the representative Baudot in a letter dated Brumaire
29, year II.)

[72] Archives Nationales: the acts and letters of the representatives
on mission are classed by departments.  - On the delegates of the
representatives on mission, I will cite but one text.  (Archives des
Affaires étrangères, vol.  333, letter of Garrigues, Auch, Pluviôse
24, year II.): "A delegate of Dartigoyte goes to l'Isle and, in the
popular club, wants the curé of the place to get rid of his priestly
attributes.  The man answers, so they tell me, that he would
cheerfully abstain from his duties, but that, if, in addition to this,
they used force he would appeal to the convention, which had no idea
of interfering with freedom of opinion.  'Very well,' replied
Dartigoyte emissary, 'I appeal to a gendarme,' and he at once ordered
his arrest."

[73] Lallier, "Une commission D'énquete et de Propagande," p.7.  (It
is composed of twelve members, selected by the club of Nantes, who
overrun the district of Ancenis, six thousand francs of fees being
allowed it.) - Babeau, II., 280.  (Dispatch of sixty commissioners,
each at six francs a day by the Troyes administration, to ascertain
the state of the supplies on hand, Prairial, year II.)

[74] For example, at Bordeaux and at Troyes.  - Archives Nationales
F7, 4421.  Register of the Revolutionary committee of Troyes, fol.
164.  Two members of the committee travel to the commune of Lusigny,
dismiss the mayor and justice, and appoint in the place of the latter
"the former curé of the country, who, some time ago, abjured
sacerdotal fanaticism." - Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.332.
(Letter of Desgranges, Bordeaux, Brumaire 15, year II.) The
representatives have just instituted "a revolutionary committee of
surveillance composed of twelve members, selected with the greatest
circumspection.  All the committees established in the department are
obliged to correspond with it, and fulfill its requisitions."

[75] Archives Nationales, AF., II, 58.  (Letter of Javogues to Collot
d'Herbois, Brumaire 28, year II.)

[76] "Recueil des Pièces Authentiques," etc., I., 195.  (Acts passed
Jan.21, 1793.)

[77] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  326.  (Letters from
Brutus, September 24; from Topino-Lebrun, jr., September 25 and
October 6, 1793.  - Vol.  330.  Letters from Brutus, Nivôse 6, year
II.) The character of the agent is often indicated orthographically.
For example, vol.334, letter from Galon-Boyer, Brumaire 18, year II.
"The public spirit is generally bad.  Those who claim to be patriots
know no restraint .  The rest are lethargic and federalism appears
innate."

[78] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.1411.  (Letter of Haupt,
Brumaire 26, year II.) - Vol.  333.  (Letter of Blessman and Haüser,
Pluviôse 4, year II.)

[79] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  333.  (Letter of Chartres
and of Caillard, Cornmune Aifranchie, Nivôse 21.) - Vol.  331.
(Letters of Desgranges, at Bordeaux, Brumaire 8 and Frimaire 3.) "The
offerings in plate and coin multiply indefinitely; all goes right.
The court-martial has condemned Dudon to death, son of the ex-
procureur-général in the former parliament at Bordeaux, Roullat,
procureur-syndic of the department, Sallenave, merchant.  These
executions excite sympathy, but nobody murmurs."

[80] Ibid., vol.  333.  (Letter of Cuny, sr., Nivôse 20.) Vols.  331,
332.  (Letters of Chepy, passim, and especially those dated Frimaire
II.) - Vol.  329.  (Letter of Chépy, August 24, 1793.) "At Annecy, the
women have cut down the liberty-pole and burnt the archives of the
club and of the commune.  At Chambéry, the people wanted to do the
same thing." - Ibid.  (September 18, 1793.) "The inhabitants around
Mont Blanc show neither spirit nor courage; the truth is, an anti-
revolutionary spirit animates all minds." - Ibid.  (Letter of August
8, 1793.) "Not only have the citizens of Grenoble, who were drawn by
lot, not set out on the expedition to Lyons, but, even of those who
have obeyed the laws, several have returned with their arms and
baggage.  No commune between St.  Laurent and Lyons would march.  The
rural municipalities, badly tainted with the federal malady, ventured
to give the troops very bad quarters, especially those who had been
drafted."

[81] Ibid.  (Letter of Cuny, jr., Brest, Brumaire 6.) " There are, in
general, very few patriots at Brest; the inhabitants are nearly all
moderates." - (Letter of Gadolle, Dunkirk, July 26, 1793.) - (Letter
of Simon, Metz, Nivôse, year II.) "Yesterday, on the news of the
capture of Toulon being announced in the theatre, .  .  .  I noticed
that only about one-third of the spectators gave way to patriotic
enthusiasm; the other two-thirds remained cold, or put on a long
face."

[82] Ibid.  (Letter of Haupt, Belfort, September 1, 1793.)

[83] Report by Courtois on the papers found in Robespierre's domicile,
p.  274.  (Letter of Darthé, Ventôse 29, year II.)

[84] "Tableau des Prisons de Toulouse," by citizen Pescayre (published
in year III.), p.101.

[85] Archives Nationales, F.7, 4421.  (Register of the Revolutionary
Committee, established at Troyes, Brumaire II, year II.) - Albert
Babeau, vol.  II., passim.  - Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.
332, Chépy (letter, Brumaire 6, Grenoble).  "The sections had
appointed seven committees of surveillance.  Although weeded out by
the club, they nevertheless alarmed the sans-culottes..  .  .
Representative Petit-Jean has issued an order, directing that there
shall be but one committee at Grenoble composed of twenty-one members.
This measure is excellent and ensures the triumph of sans-culotteism."
- Archives Nationales, F.7, 4434.  (Letter of Pérrieu to Brissot,
Bordeaux, March 9, 1793.) Before June 2, the national club "of
Bordeaux, composed of Maratists, did not comprise more than eight or
ten individuals at most." - Moniteur, XXII., 133.  (Speech by
Thibeaudeau on the popular club of Poitiers, Vendémiaire II, year
III.) - Ibid.  (Session of Brumaire 5, year III., letter of Calès, and
session of Brumaire 17, year III., report by Calès.) "The popular club
of Dijon made all neighboring administrative bodies, citizens and
districts tremble.  All were subject to its laws, and three or four
men in it made them.  This club and the municipality were one body."
"The Terror party does not exist here, or, if it does exist, it does
not amount to much: out of twenty thousand inhabitants there are not
six who can legitimately be suspected of belonging to it."

[86] Baroly, "Les Jacobins Demasqués," (IV.  8vo., of 8pp., year II).
"The Jacobin club, with its four hundred active members at Paris, and
the four thousand others in the provinces, not less devoted, represent
the living force of the Revolution."

[87] Archives Nationales, D.  § I., 10.  (Orders of representatives
Delacroix, Louchet, and Legendre, Nivôse 12, year II.) "On the
petition of the Committee of Surveillance of Evreux, which sets forth
that all its members are without means, and that it will be impossible
for them to continue their duties since they are without resources for
supporting their families," the representatives allow three of them
two hundred and seventy francs each, and a fourth one hundred and
eighty francs, as a gratuity (outside of the three francs a day.)

[88] Ibid.  AF., II., 111.  (Order of Albitte and La Porte, Prairial
18, year II.)

[89] Albert Babeau, II., 154-157.  - Moniteur, XXII.  425.  (Session
of Brumaire 13, year III.  Speech by Cambon.) "A government was
organized in which surveillance alone cost 591 millions per annum.
Every man who tilled the ground or worked in a shop, at once abandoned
his pursuit for a place on the Revolutionary Committees .  .  .  where
he got five francs a day."

[90] "Tableau des Prisons de Toulouse," by citizen Pescare, 162, 166,
435.

[91] Berryat Saint-Prix, "La Justice Révolutionaire," (second edition)
p.  XIX.  - Ibid., XIV.  At Rochefort there is on the revolutionary
tribunal a mason, a shoemaker, a caulker, and a cook; at Bordeaux, on
the military commission, an actor, a wine-clerk, a druggist, a baker,
a journeyman-gilder, and later, a cooper and a leather-dresser.

[92] I heard these expressions during my conversations with old
peasants.  - Archives Nationales, AF.,II., 111.  (Order of the
Representative Ichon, Messidor 18, year II.) "The popular club of
Chinon will be immediately regenerated.  Citizens (I omit their
names), the following showing their occupations: shoemaker, policeman.
sabot-maker, cooper, carter, shoemaker, joiner, butcher carpenter and
mason, will form the committee which is to do the weeding-out and
choose successors among those that offer to become members of the
club."? Ibid., D., §I, 10.  (Orders of the Representatives Delacroix,
Louchet and Legendre, on mission in the department of Seine-Inférieure
for the purpose of removing, at Conchez, the entire administration,
and for forming there a new revolutionary committee, with full powers,
Frimaire 9, year II.) The members of the committee, the nature of
which is indicated, are two coopers, one gardener, two carpenters, one
merchant, a coach-driver and a tailor.  (One finds in the archives, in
the correspondence of the representatives, plenty of orders appointing
authorities of the same sort.)

[93] Albert Babeau, II., 296.

[94] The French text reads: "Sa profession est fame de Paillot-
Montabert; son revenu est vivre de ses revenus; ces relation son d'une
fame nous ny portons point d'atantion; ces opignons nous les présumons
semblable à ceux de son mary."

[95] Archives Nationales, F7, 4421.  Order of the Committee of
Surveillance of the third section of Troyes, refusing civic
certificates to seventy-two persons, or sending them before the
central committee as "marchands d'argant, aristocrate, douteux,
modére, intrigant, egoiste fanatique.  Fait et areté par nous, membre
du Comité.  - Ib., Mémoire des Commissaires de la 5e seiscion dite de
la liberté nommé par le citoyen de Baris (Paris) pour faire les visite
de l'argenteri ché les citoyens de la liste fait par les citoyens Diot
et Bailly et Jaquin savoir depence du 13 et 14 et 15 Frimaire pour
leur nouriture du troyes jour monte à 24 fr.

[96] Albert Babeau, II., 154.

[97] Archives Nationales, D., §I, 5.  (Mission of Representative
Albert, in Aube and in Marne.) - These notes are made on the spot,
with a thorough knowledge of the situation, by zealous republicans who
are not without common-sense and of average honesty, (chiefly in
Pluviôse and Ventôse, year III).  - Letter of Albert to the
directories of the two departments, Prairial 3, year II.  "I am
satisfied, during the course of my mission, of the necessity of
reorganizing the municipalities throughout both departments."

[98] Ibid.  Orders of Albert, Ventôse 5, and Pluviôse 29, year III.,
reorganizing the courts and administrations in the districts of Ervy,
Arcis and Nogent-sur-Seine, with a tabular statement of the names of
those removed and the reasons for so doing.

[99] Petition of Jean Nicolas Antoine, former member of the Directory
of the district of Troyes for twenty-eight months.  (Ventose 9, year
II I.) Shut up in Troyes, he asks permission to go to Paris, "I have a
small lot of goods which it is necessary for me to sell in Paris.  It
is my native town and I know more people there than anywhere else."-
Ibid.  Information furnished on Antoine by the Conseil-general of the
Commune of Troyes.

[100] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 59.  (Memorials dated Messidor
28, year II., by an emissary of the Committee of Public Safety, sent
to Troyes, Prairial 29, to report on the situation of things and on
the troubles in Troyes.) - Albert Babeau, II., 203, 205 and 112, 122.
- Cf.  179.  "Gachez, intoxicated, about eleven o'clock at night, with
several women as drunk as himself, compelled the keeper of the Temple
of Reason to open the doors, threatening him with the guillotine." -
Ibid., 166.  He addressed the sans-culottes in the popular club: "Now
is the time to put yourselves in the place of the rich.  Strike, and
don't put it off!" - Ibid., 165.  " 42 633 livres were placed in the
hands of Gachez and the committee, as secret revolutionary service
money.  .  .  .  Between December 4 and 10 Gachez received 20 000
livres, in three orders, for revolutionary expenses and provisional
aid.  .  .  .  The leaders of the party disposed of these sums without
control and, it may be added, without scruple; Gachez hands over only
four thousand livres to the sectional poor-committee.  On Nivôse 12,
there remains in the treasury of the poor fund only 3738 livres, 12
000 having been diverted or squandered."

[101] "Frochot," by Louis Passy, 172.  (Letter of Pajot, member of the
revolutionary committee of Aignay-le-Duc.) "Denunciations occupied
most of the time at our meetings, and it is there that one could see
the hatreds and vengeance of the colleagues who ruled us."

[102] Archives Nationales, D., § I, No.4.  The following is a sample
among others of the impositions of the revolutionary committees.
(Complaint of Mariotte, proprietor, former mayor of Chatillon-sur-
Seine, Floréal 27, year II.) "On Brumaire 23, year II., I was stopped
just as I was taking post at Mussy, travelling on business for the
Republic, and provided with a commission and passport from the
Minister of war.  .  .  .  I was searched in the most shameful manner;
citizen Ménétrier, member of the committee, used towards me the
foulest language .  .  .  .  I was confined in a tavern; instead of
two gendarmes which would have been quite sufficient to guard me, I
had the whole brigade, who passed that night and the next day
drinking, until, in wine and brandy the charge against me in the
tavern amounted to sixty francs.  And worse still, two members of the
same committee passed a night guarding me and made me pay for it.  Add
to this, they said openly before me that I was a good pigeon to pluck.
.  .  .  They gave me the escort of a state criminal of the highest
importance, three national gendarmes, mounted, six National Guards,
and even to the Commandant of the National Guard; citizen Mièdan,
member of the revolutionary committee, put himself at the head of the
cortege, ten men to conduct one! .  .  .  .  I was obliged to pay my
torturers, fifty francs to the commandant, and sixty to his men."

[103] Moniteur, XXI., 261.  (Speech by an inhabitant of Troyes in the
Jacobin Club, Paris, Messidor 26, year II.)

[104] Albert Babeau, II., 164.  (Depositions of the tavern-keeper and
of the commissioner, Garnier.)

[105] "Frochot," by Louis Passy, 170, 172.  (Letter by Pajot and
petition of the Aignay municipality, March 10, 1795.) - Bibliotheque
Nationale, L., 41.  No.1802.  (Denunciation by six sections of the
commune of Dijon to the National Convention.)

[106] "Recueil de Pièces Authentiques sur la Révolution de
Strasbourg," I., 187, and letter of Burger, Thermidor 25, year II.

[107] Archives Nationales, D., § I, 6 (file37) - Letter of the members
of the Strasbourg revolutionary committee, Ventôse 13, year III.,
indicating to the mayor and municipal officers of Chalons-sur-Marne
certain Jacobins of the town as suitable members of the Propaganda at
Strasbourg.

[108] "Recueil de Pièces Authentiques concernant la Révolution à
Strasbourg," I.,71.  Deposition of the recorder Weis on the circuit of
the Revolutionary Tribunal, composed of Schneider, Clavel and Taffin.
"The judges never left the table without having become intoxicated
with everything of the finest, and, in this state, they gathered in
the tribunal and condemned the accused to death." - Free living and
"extravagant expenditure" were common even "among the employees of the
government." "I encountered," says Meissner, "government carters
served with chickens, pastry and game, whilst at the traveler's table
there was simply an old leg of mutton and a few poor side-dishes."
("Voyage en France," toward the end of 1795, p.371.)

[109] Some of them, nevertheless, are not ugly, but merely sots.  The
following is a specimen.  A certain Velu, a born vagabond, formerly in
the alms-house and brought up there, then a shoemaker or a cobbler,
afterwards teaching school in the faubourg de Vienne, and at last a
haranguer and proposer of tyrannicide motions, short, stout and as
rubicund as his cap, is made President of the Popular club at Blois,
then delegate for domiciliary visits, and, throughout the reign of
Terror, he is a principal personage in the town, district and
department.  (Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires," (MS.) March 21, 1793
and June, 1793.) In June, 1793, this Velu is ordered to visit the
chateau de Cheverney, to verify the surrender of all feudal documents.
He arrives unexpectedly, meets the steward, Bambinet, enters the
mayor's house, who keeps an inn, and drinks copiously, which gives
Bambinet time to warn M. Dufort de Cheverney and have the suspicious
registers concealed.  - This done, "Velu is obliged to leave his
bottle and march to the chateau.  - He assumed haughtiness and aimed
at familiarity; he would put his hand on his breast and, taking yours,
address you: "Good day, brother." - He came there at nine o'clock in
the morning, advanced, took my hand and said: "Good-day, brother, how
are you?" "Very well, citizen, and how are you?" "You do not tutoyer -
you are not up to the Revolution? "We'll see - will you step in the
parlor?" "Yes, brother, I'll follow you." - We enter; he sees my wife
who, I may say, has an imposing air.  He boldly embraces her and,
repeating his gesture on the breast, takes her hand and says: "Good-
day, sister." "Come," I interpose, "let us take breakfast, and, if you
please, you shall dine with me." "Yes, but on one condition, that tu
me tutoie." "I will try, but I am not in the habit of it." After
warming up his intellect and heart with a bottle of wine, we get rid
of him by sending him to inspect the archives-room, along with my son
and Bambinet.  It is amusing, for he can only read print.  .  .
Bambinet, and the procureur, read the titles aloud, and pass over the
feudalisms.  Velu does not notice this and always tells them to go on.
- After an hour, tired out, he comes back: "All right," he says, "now
let me see your chateau, which is a fine one." He had heard about a
room where there were fantocini, in the attic.  He goes up, opens some
play-books, and, seeing on the lists of characters the name of King
and Prince, he, says to me: "You must scratch those out, and play only
republican pieces." The descent is by a back-stairs.  On the way down
he encounters a maid of my wife's, who is very pretty; he stops and,
regarding my son, says: "You must as a good Republican, sleep with
that girl and marry her." I look at him and reply: " Monsieur Velu,
listen; we are well behaved here, and such language cannot be allowed.
You must respect the young people in my house." A little disconcerted,
he tames down and is quite deferential to Madame de Cheverney.  - "You
have pen and ink on your table," he says, "bring them here." "What
for," I ask, "to take my inventory?" "No, but I must make a procès-
verbal.  You help me; it will be better for you, as you can fix it to
suit you" This was not badly done, to conceal his want of knowledge.
- We go in to dinner.  My servants waited on the table; I had not
yielded to the system of a general table for all of us, which would
not have pleased my servants any more than myself.  Curiosity led them
all to come in and see us dining together.  - "Brother," says Velu to
me, "don't these people eat with you?" (He saw the table set for only
four persons.) I reply: " Brother, that would not be any more
agreeable to them than to myself.  Ask them." - He ate little, drank
like an ogre, and was talkative about his amours; getting carried away
he got so close to being naughty that he upset my wife, without
actually going to far.  Apropos of the Revolution, and the danger we
incurred, he said innocently: "Don't I run as much risk as anybody? It
is my opinion that, in three months, I shall have my head off! But we
must all take our chance!" - Now and then, he indulged in sans-
culottisms.  He seized the servant's hand, who changed his plate :
"Brother, I beg you to take my place, and let me wait on you in my
turn " - He drank the cordials, and finally left, pleased with his
reception.  - Returning to the inn, he stays until nine o'clock at
night and stuffs himself, but is not intoxicated.  One bottle had no
effect on him; he could empty a cask and show no signs of it.

[110] Moniteur, XXII., 425.  (Session of Brumaire 13, year III.)
Cambon, in relation to the revolutionary committees, says: "I would
observe to the Assembly that they were never paid." A member replies:
"They took their pay themselves." ("Yes, yes." - Applause.)

[111] Moniteu, XXII., 711.  (Report by Cambon, Frimaire 6, year III.)
- Cambon stated, indeed, Frimaire 26, year II., (Moniteur, XVIII.,
680), concerning these taxes  "Not one word, not one sou has yet
reached the Treasury; they want to override the Convention which made
the Revolution."

[112] Ibid., 720.  "The balances reported, of which the largest
portion is already paid into the vaults of the National Treasury,
amount to twenty millions one hundred and sixty-six thousand three
hundred and thirty livres." - At Paris, Marseilles, and Bordeaux, in
the3 large towns where tens of millions were raised in three-quarters
of the districts, Cambon, three months after Thermidor, could not yet
obtain, I will not say the returns, but a statement of the sums
raised.  The national agents either did not reply to him, or did it
vaguely, or stated that in their districts there was neither civic
donation nor revolutionary tax, and particularly at Marseilles, where
a forced loan had been made of four millions.  - Cf.  De Martel, "
Fouché," P.245.  (Memorial of the central administration of Nièvre,
Prairial 19, year III.) "The account returned by the city of Nevers
amounts to eighty thousand francs, the use of which has never been
verified.  .  .  .  This tax, in part payment of the war subsidy, was
simply a trap laid by the political actors in order to levy a
contribution on honest, credulous citizens." - Ibid., 217.  On
voluntary gifts and forced taxation cf.  at Nantes, the use made of
revolutionary taxes, brought out on the trial of the revolutionary
committee.

[113] Ludovic Sciout, IV., 19.  Report of Representative Becker.
(Journal des Débats et Décrets, p.743, Prairial, year III.) He returns
from a mission to Landau and renders an account of the executions
committed by the Jacobin agents in the Rhenish provinces.  They levied
taxes, sword in hand, and threatened the refractory with the
guillotine at Strasbourg.  The receipts which passed under the
reporter's eyes "presented the sum of three millions three hundred and
forty-five thousand seven hundred and eighty-five livres, two deniers,
whilst our colleague, Cambon, reports only one hundred and thirty-
eight thousand paid in."

[114] Moniteur, XXII., 754.  (Report of Grégoire, Frimaire 24, year
III.) "Rascallery - this word recalls the old revolutionary
committees, most of which formed the scum of society and which showed
so many aptitudes for the double function of robber and persecutor."

[115] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 107.  (Orders of Representatives
Ysabeau and Tallien, Bordeaux, Brumaire 11 and 17, year II.) - Third
order, promulgated by the same parties, Frimaire 2, year II.,
replacing this committee by another of twelve members and six
deputies, each at two hundred francs a month.  Fourth order, Pluviôse
16, year II., dismissing the members of the foregoing committee, as
exagérés and disobedient.  It is because they regard their local
royalty in quite a serious light.-Ibid., AF., II., 46.  ("Extracts
from the minutes of the meetings of the revolutionary committee of
Bordeaux," Prairial, year II.) This extract, consisting of eighteen
pages, shows in detail the inside workings of a revolutionary
committee the number of arrested goes on increasing; on the 27th of
Prairial there are 1524.  The committee is essentially a police
office; it delivers certificates of civism, issues warrants of arrest,
corresponds with other committees, even very remote, at Limoges, and
Clermont-Ferrand, delegates any of its members to make investigations
or domicialiary searches, to affix seals, and it receives and
transmits denunciations, summons the denounced to appear before it,
reads interrogations, writes to the Committee of Public Safety, etc.
The following are samples of its warrants of arrest: "Muller, a
riding-master, will be confined in the former Petit Seminaire, under
suspicion of aristocracy, according to public opinion." - Another
example, (Archives Nationales, F.7, 2475.  Register of the procès-
verbaux of the revolutionary committee of the Piques section, Paris,
June 3, 1793.) Warrant of arrest against Boucher, grocer, rue Neuve du
Luxembourg, "suspect" of incivisme and "having cherished wicked and
perfidious intentions against his wife." Boucher, arrested, declares
that, "what he said and did in his own house, concerned nobody but
himself." On which he was led to prison.

[116] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 30 (No.105).  Examination of Jean
Davilliers, and other ransomed parties.

[117] Berryat Saint-Prix, 313.  (Trial of Lacombe and his accomplices
after Thermidor.)

[118] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 46.  (Letter of Julien to the
Committee of Public Safety, Bordeaux, Messidor 12, year II.) -
Moniteur, XXII., 713.  (Report by Cambon, Frimaire 6, year III.) At
Verins, citizens were imprisoned and then set at liberty "on
consideration of a fee." - Albert Babeau, II., 164, 165, 206.  (Report
by Cambon, Frimaire 6, year II.) "Citoyenne (madame) Deguerrois,
having come to procure the release of her husband, a public
functionary demanded of her ten thousand livres, which he reduced to
six thousand for doing what she desired." - "One document attests that
Massey paid two thousand livres, and widow Delaporte six hundred
livres, to get out of prison."

[119] Mallet-Dupan, "First letter to a Genoa merchant," (March I,
1796), pp.33-35.  "One of the wonders of the reign of Terror is the
slight attention given to the trafficking in life and death,
characteristic of terrorism.  .  .  .  We scarcely find a word on the
countless bargains through which 'suspect' citizens bought themselves
out of captivity, and imprisoned citizens bought off the guillotine.
.  .  .  Dungeons and executions were as much matters of trade as the
purchase of cattle at a fair." This traffic "was carried on in all the
towns, bourgs and departments surrendered to the Convention and
Revolutionary Committees." .  .  .  .  "It has been established since
the 10th of August." "I will only cite among a multitude of instances
the unfortunate Duc du Châtelet: never did anybody pay more for his
execution!" - Wallon, "Histoire du Tribunal Revolutionnaire de Paris,"
VI., 88.  (Denunciation of Fouquier-Tinville, signed Saulnie.)
According to Saulnie he dined regularly twice a week at No 6 rue
Serpente, with one Demay, calling himself a lawyer and living with a
woman named Martin.  In this death-trap, in the middle of orgies, the
freedom or death of those in prison was bargained for in money with
impunity.  One head alone, belonging to the house of Boufflers,
escaping the scaffold through the intrigues of these vampires, was
worth to them thirty thousand livres, of which one thousand were paid
down and a bond given for the rest, payable on being set at liberty.
- Morellet, "Memoires," II., 32.  The agent of Mesdames de Bouffiers
was Abbé Chevalier, who had formerly known Fouquier-Tinville in the
office of a procureur an Parliament and who, renewing the
acquaintance, came and drank with Fouquier.  "He succeeded in having
the papers of the ladies Bouffiers, which were ready to be sent to the
Tribunal, placed at the bottom of the file." - Mallet-Dupan, "
Memoires," II., 495.  "Fouquier-Tinville received a pension of one
thousand crowns a month from Mesdames de Bouffiers; the ransom
increased one quarter each month on account of the atrocity of the
circumstances.  This method saved these ladies, whilst those who paid
a sum in gross lost their lives.  .  .  It was Du Vaucel, fermier-
general, who saved the Princess of Tarente .  .  .  .for five hundred
louis, after having saved two other ladies for three hundred louis,
given to one of the Jacobin leaders."

[120] "Tableau des Prisons de Toulouse," 324.  Coudert, of the
Municipal Council, shoemaker, charged with the duty of taking silver-
plate from the accused, did not know how, or was unwilling, to draw up
any other than an irregular and valueless procès-verbal.  On this, an
accused party objected and refused to sign.  "Take care, you,"
exclaims Coudert in a rage, "with your damned cleverness, you are
playing the stubborn.  You are nothing but a bloody fool! You are
getting into a bad box! If you don't sign, I'll have you guillotined."
Frequently, there are no papers at all.  (De Martel, "Fouché," p.236.
Memorial by the authorities of Allier, addressed to the Convention,
document 9.) October 30, 1793.  Order of the revolutionary committee
enjoining nocturnal visits in all " suspect " houses in Moulins, to
remove all gold, silver and copper.  "Eleven parties are made up.  .
.  .  each to visit eight or ten houses.  Each band is headed by one
of the committee, with one municipal officer, accompanied by
locksmiths and a revolutionary guard.  The dwellings of the accused
and other private individuals are searched.  They force secretaries
and wardrobes of which they do not find the keys.  They pillage the
gold and silver coin.  They carry off plate, jewels, copper utensils
and other effects, bed-clothes, docks, vehicles, etc.  No receipt is
given.  No statement is made of what is carried off.  They rest
content by at the end of the month, reporting, in a sort of procès-
verbal drawn up at a meeting of the committee, that, according to
returns of the visits made, very little plate was found, and only a
little money in gold and silver, all without any calculation or
enumeration." - "Souvenirs et Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," p.93.
(February 25, 1795.) The meetings of the popular club "were largely
devoted to reading the infamous doings and robberies of the
revolutionary committee.  .  .  .  The members who designated
'suspects' often arrested them themselves, and drew up a procès-verbal
in which they omitted to state the jewels and gold they found."

[121] Ibid., 461.  (Vendemaire 24, year III.  Visit of Representative
Malarmé.) The former Duc de Narbonne-Lorra aged eighty-four, says to
Malarmé: "Citizen representative, excuse me if I keep my cap on; I
lost my hair in that prison, without having been able to get
permission to have a wig made; it is worse than being robbed on the
road." "Did they steal anything from you?" "They stole one hundred and
forty five louis d'or and paid me with an acquittance for a tax for
the sans-culottes, which is another robbery done to the citizens of
this commune where I have neither home nor possessions." "Who
committed this robbery? " "It was Citizen Berger, of the municipal
council." " Was nothing else taken from you?" "They took a silver
coffee-pot, two soap-cases and a silver shaving-dish" "Who took those
articles?" "It was Citizen Miot (a notable of the council)." Miot
confesses to having kept these objects and not taken them to the
Mint.-Ibid., 178.  (Ventôse 20, year II.) Prisoners all have their
shoes taken, even those who had but one pair, a promise being made
that they should have sabots in exchange, which they never got.  Their
cloaks also were taken with a promise to pay for them, which was never
done.  - "Souvenirs et Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," p.92.
(February 25, 1795.) The sessions of the popular club were largely
devoted to reading the infamies and robberies of the revolutionary
committee.  Its members, who designated the suspects, often arrested
them themselves; they made levies and reports of these in which they
omitted the gold and jewels found."

[122] Moniteur, XXII.  133.  (Session of Vendémiaire II, year III.)
Report by Thibaudeau.  "These seven individuals are reprobates who
were dismissed by the people's representatives for having stolen the
effects of persons arrested.  A document is on record in which they
make a declaration that, not remembering the value of the effects
embezzled, they agree to pay damages to the nation of twenty-two
francs each."

[123] Berryat Saint-Prix, 447.  Judge Ragot was formerly a joiner at
Lyons, and Viot, the public prosecutor, a former deserter from the
Penthièvre regiment.  "Other accused persons were despoiled.  Little
was left them other than their clothes, which were in a bad state.
Nappier, the bailiff, was, later, (Messidor, year III.), condemned to
irons for having appropriated a part of the effects, jewels and
assignats belonging to persons under accusation."

[124] The words of Camille Desmoulins in " La France Libre," (August,
1782).

[125] De Martel, " Fouché," 362.-Ibid.,, 132, 162, 179, 427, 443.  -
Lecarpentier, in La Manche, constantly stated: "Those who do not like
the Revolution, must pay those who make it."

[126] Marcelin Boudet, 175.  (Address of Monestier to the popular
clubs of Puy-de-Dome, February 23, 1793.)

[127] Alexandrine des Echerolles,  "Une famille noble sous la
Terreur."

[128] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 65.  (Letter of General Kermorvan
to the president of the committee of Public Safety, Valenciennes,
Fructidor 12, year III.)

[129] Report by Courtois, " Sur les papiers de Robespierre," (Pieces
justificatives, pp.  312-324), Letters of Reverchon, Germinal 29,
Floréal 7 and 23, and by La Porte, Germinal 24, year II.

[130] Ibid.  Letter by La Porte "I do not know what fatality induces
patriots here not to tolerate their brethren whom they call strangers
.  .  .  They have declared to us that they would not suffer any of
them to hold office." The representatives dared arrest but two robbers
and despoilers, who are now free and declaiming against them at Paris.
"Countless grave and even atrocious circumstances are daily presented
to us on which we hesitate to act, lest we should strike patriots, or
those who call themselves such .  .  .  Horrible depredations are
committed."

[131] Ibid.  Letter by Reverchon : "These fanatics all want the
Republic simply for them-selves." .  .  .  "They call themselves
patriots only to cut the throats of their brethren and get rich." -
Guillon de Montléon, " Histoire de la ville de Lyons Pendant la
Révolution  III., 166.  (Report by Fouché, April, 1794.) "Innocent
persons, acquitted by the terrible tribunal of the Revolutionary
committee, were again consigned to the dungeons of criminals through
the despotic orders of the thirty-two committees, because they were so
unfortunate as to complain that, on returning home, they could not
find the strictly necessary objects they had left there."

[132] Meissner, "Voyage en France dans les Derniers Mois de 1795,"
p.343.  "A certain domain was handed over to one of their creatures by
the revolutionary departments for almost nothing, less than the
proceeds of the first cut of wood."- Moniteur, XXIII., 397.  (Speech
by Bourdon de l'Oise, May 6, 1795.) "A certain farmer paid for his
farm worth five thousand francs by the sale of one horse."

[133] Moniteur, XXII., 82.  (Report by Grégoire, Fructidor 14, year
II.) Ibid., 775.  (Report by Grégoire, Frimaire 24, year III.)

[134] "Recueil de Pièces Authentiques sur la Révolution à Strasbourg,"
II., p.  I.  (Procès-verbal, drawn up in the presence of the elder
Mouet and signed by him.)

[135] Moniteur, XXII., 775.  (Report of Grégoire, Frimaire 24, year
III.) - Ibid., 711.  (Report by Cambon, Frimaire 6, year III.) -
Archives Nationales, AF., II., 65.  (Letter of General Kermorvan,
Valenciennes, Fructidor 12, year III.)

[136] "Tableau des Prisons de Toulouse," 184.  (Visit of Ventôse 27,
year II.)

[137] Archives Nationales, F.7, 7164.  (Department of Var "Ideé
générale et appréciation avec détails sur chaque canton," year V.)

[138] Ibid., F.7, 7171 (No.  7915).- (Department of Bouches-du-Rhône,
"Ideé générale," year V.) - (Letters of Miollis, commissioner of the
Directory in the department, Ventôse 14 and 16, year V.  Letter of
Gen.  Willot to the Minister, Ventôse 10, and of Gen.  Merle to Gen.
Willot, Ventôse 17, year V.) "Several sections of anarchists travel
from one commune to another exciting weak citizens to riots and
getting them to take part in the horrors they are meditating."- Ibid.,
F 7, 7164.  Letter of Gen.  Willot to the Minister, Aries, Pluviôse
12, year V., with supporting documents, and especially a letter of the
director of the jury, on the violence committed by, and the reign of,
the Jacobins in Aries.) Their party "is composed of the vilest
artisans and nearly all the sailors." The municipality recruited
amongst former terrorists, "has enforced for a year back the agrarian
law, devastation of the forests, pillage of the wheat-crops, by bands
of armed men under pretext of the right of gleaning, the robbery of
animals at the plough as well as of the flocks," etc.

[139] Ibid., F.7, 7171.  "These commissioners (of the quarter) notify
the exclusives, and even swindlers, when warrants are out against
them.  .  .  .  The same measures carried out in the primary
assemblies on the 1st of Thermidor last, in the selection of municipal
officers, have been successfully revived in the organization of the
National Guard - threats, insults, shouting, assaults, compulsory
ejection from meetings then governed by the amnestied, finally, the
appointment of the latter to the principal offices.  In effect, all,
beginning with the places of battalion leaders and reaching to those
of corporals, are exclusively filled by their partisans.  The result
is that the honest, to whom serving with men regarded by them with
aversion is repugnant, employ substitutes instead of mounting guard
themselves, the security of the town being in the hands of those who
themselves ought to be watched."

[140] Archives Nationales, F.7, 3273.  (Letter of Mérard, former
administrator and judge in 1790 and 1791, in years III., IV.  and V.,
to the Minister, Apt, Pluviôse 15, year III., with personal references
and documentary evidence.) "I can no longer refrain at the sight of so
many horrors .  .  .  .  The justices of the peace and the director of
the jury excuse themselves on the ground that no denunciations or
witnesses are brought forward.  Who would dare appear against men
arrogating to themselves the title of superior patriots, foremost in
every revolutionary crisis, and with friends in every commune and
protectors in all high places? The favor they enjoyed was such that
the commune of Gordes was free of any levy of conscripts and from all
requisitions.  People thus disposed, they said, to second civic and
administrative views, could not be humored too much.  .  .  .  .  This
discouraging state of things simply results from the weakness,
inexperience, ignorance, apathy and immorality of the public
functionaries who, since the 18th of Fructidor, year V., swarm, with a
few exceptions only, among the constituted authorities.  Whatever is
most foul and incompetent is in office, every good citizen being
frightened to death."- Ibid.  (Letter of Montauban, director of the
registry since 1793 to the Minister of the Interior, a compatriot,
Avignon, Pluviôse 7, year VII.) "Honest folks are constantly annoyed
and put down by the authors and managers of the 'Glaciere'.  .  .  .
.  by the tools of the bloody tribunal of Orange and the incendiaries
of Bedouim." He enjoins secrecy on this letter, which, "if known to
the Glacièrists, or Orangeists, would cost him his life."

[141] Ibid., F.7, 7164.  (Department of Var, year V., "Ideé
Générale.") "National character is gone; it is even demoralized: an
office-holder who has not made his fortune quickly is regarded as a
fool."

[142] Moniteur, XXII., 240.  (Indictment of the fourteen members of
the Revolutionary committee of Nantes, and the summing-up of the
examination, Vendémiaire 23, year II.) When there is no special
information concerning the other committees the verdict, on the whole,
is nearly always as overwhe1ming.-Ibid.  (Session of Vendémiaire 12,
year III.  complaint of a deputation from Ferney-Voltaire.) "The Gex
district was, for over a year, a prey to five or six scoundrels who
took refuge there.  Under the mask of patriotism they succeeded in
getting possession of all the offices.  Vexations of every kind,
robberies of private houses, squandering of public money, were
committed by these monsters." (The Ferney deputies brought with them
the testimony of witnesses.) - Ibid., 290.  (Letters of Representative
Goupilleau, Beziers, Vendémiaire 28, year III.  on the terrorists of
Vaucluse.) " These carnivorous fellows, regretting the times when they
could rob and massacre with impunity .  .  .  .  Who, six months ago,
were starving and who now live in the most scandalous opulence .  .  .
Squanderers of the public funds, robbers of private fortunes .  .  .
Guilty of rapine, of forced contributions, of extortions," etc.  -
Prudhomme, "Les crimes de la Révolution," VI., 79.  (On the
Revolutionary committee installed by Fouché at Nevers.) The local
investigation shows that the eleven leaders were men of vile
character, unfrocked and disreputable priests, lawyers and notaries
driven out of their professional bodies, and even from the popular
clubs, on account of their dishonesty, penniless actors, surgeons
without patients, depraved, ruined, incapable men, and two jail-birds.

[143] Beaulieu, III., 754.  - Cf.  "The Revolution," vol.  II., ch.
I., § 9.

[144] "Recueil de pièces authentiques sur la Révolution à Strasbourg,"
I., 21.  - Archives Nationales D., I., § 6.  (Orders by Rousselin,
Frimaire II, year II.)

[145] "Un Sejour en France de 1792 à 1795," p.409.

[146] I have not found a complete list of the towns and departments
which had a revolutionary army.  The correspondence of representatives
on mission and published documents verify the presence of
revolutionary armies in the towns mentioned.

[147] De Martel, "Fouché," 338.  (Text of the orders of the
commissioners of Public Safety.) The detachment sent to Lyons
comprises twelve hundred fusiliers, six hundred gunners, one hundred
and fifty horses.  Three hundred thousand livres are remitted as
traveling expenses to the commissary, fifty thousand to Collot
d'Herbois, and nineteen thousand two hundred to the Jacobin civilians
accompanying them.

[148] Moniteur.  (Session of Brumaire 17 year III.) Letter of
Representative Calès to the Convention.  "Under the pretext of
guarding the prisons, the municipality (of Dijon) had a revolutionary
army which I broke up two days ago, as it cost six thousand francs a
month, and would not obey the commander of the armed force, and served
as a support to intriguers.  These soldiers, who were all workmen out
of employment, do nothing but post themselves in the tribunes of the
clubs, where they, with the women they bring along with them, applaud
the leaders, and so threaten citizens who are disposed to combat them,
and force these to keep their mouths shut." ??De Martel, "Fouché,"
425.  "Javogues, to elude a decree of the Convention (Frimaire 14)
suppressing the revolutionary army in the departments, converted the
twelve hundred men he had embodied in it in the Loire into paid
soldiers."? Ibid., 132.  (Letter of Goulin, Bourg, Frimaire 23.)
"Yesterday, at Bourg-Régeriéré, I found Javogues with about four
hundred men of the revolutionary army whom he had brought with him on
the 20th instant."

[149] Buchez et Roux, XXIX., 45.  - Moniteur, XX., 67.  (Report of
Barère, Germinal 7.) - Sauzay, IV., 303.  (Orders of Representative
Bassal at Bésançon.)

[150] We see by Barère's report (Germinal 7, year II.) that the
revolutionary army of Paris, instead of being six thousand men, was
only four thousand, which is creditable to Paris.  - Mallet-Dupan,
II., 52.  (cf.  "The Revolution," II., 353.) - Gouvion St.  Cyr, I.,
137.  "In these times, the representatives had organized in Haut-Rhin
what they called a revolutionary army, composed of deserters and all
the vagabonds and scamps they could pick up who had belonged to the
popular club; they dragged along after it what they called judges and
a guillotine." - "Hua, "Souvenirs d'un Avocat," 196.

[151] Riouffe, "Memoires d'un deténue." P.31.

[152] Ibid., "These balls were brought out ostentatiously and shown to
the people beforehand.  The tying of our hands and passing three ropes
around our waists did not seem to him sufficient.  We kept these irons
on the rest of the route, and they were so heavy that, if the carriage
had tilted to one side, we should inevitably have had our legs broken.
The gate-keepers of the conciergerie of Paris, who had held their
places nine-teen years, were astonished at it."

[153] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.331.  (Letter of Haupt,
Belfort, Frimaire 13, year II.)

[154] Ibid.  (Letter by Desgranges, Bordeaux, Frimaire 10.)

[155] Ibid., vol.332.  (Letter of Thiberge, Marseilles, Frimaire 14.)
"I surrounded the town with my small army."

[156] Ibid., 331.  (Orders of Representative Bassal, Besançon Frimaire
5.) "No citizen shall keep in his house more than four months'
supplies.  .  .  .  Every citizen with more than this will deposit the
surplus in the granary 'd'abondance' provided for the purpose.  .  .
.  Immediately on receipt of the present order, the municipality will
summon all citizens that can thresh and proceed immediately, without
delay, to the threshing-ground, under penalty of being prosecuted as
refractory to the law.  .  .  .  The revolutionary army is specially
charged with the execution of the articles of this order, and the
revolutionary tribunals, following this army with the enforcement of
the penalties inflicted according to this order." - Other documents
show us that the revolutionary army, organized in the department of
Doubs and in the five neighboring departments, comprises, in all, two
thousand four hundred men.  (Ibid., vol., 1411.  Letter of Meyenfeld
to Minister Desforges, Brumaire 27, year II.) - Archives Nationales,
AF., II., 111.  (Order of Couthon, Maignet, Chateauneuf, Randon, La
Porte and Albitte, Commune-Affranchie, Brumaire 9, year II.,
establishing in the ten surrounding departments a revolutionary army
of one thousand men per department, for the conscription of grain.
Each army is to be directed by commissioners, strangers to the
department, and is to operate in other departments than in the one
where it is raised.)

[157] Archives des Affaires étrangères, 331.  (Letter of Chépy,
Frimaire II.) - Writing one month before this, (Brumaire 6) he says:
"The farmers show themselves very hostile against the towns and the
law of the maximum.  Nothing can be done without a revolutionary
army."

[158] Mercier, "Paris Pendant la Révolution," I., 357.

[159] Hua, 197.  I do not find in any printed or manuscript document
but one case of resistance, that of the brothers Chaperon, in the
hamlet of Leges, near Sens, who declare that they have no wheat except
for their own use, and who defend themselves by the use of a gun.  The
gendarmerie not being strong enough to overcome them, the tocsin is
sounded and the National Guard of Sens and the neighborhood is
summoned; bringing cannon, the affair ends with the burning of the
house.  The two brothers are killed.  Before being overcome, however,
they had struck down the captain of the National Guard of Sens and
killed or wounded nearly forty of their assailants.  A surviving
brother and a sister are guillotined.  (June, 1794.  Wallon, IV.,
352.)

[160] Moniteur, XVIII., 663.  (Session of Frimaire 24, report by
Lecointre.) "The communes of Thieux, Jully and many others were
victims to their brigandage." - "The stupor in the country is such
that the poor sufferers dare not complain of these vexations because,
they say, they are only too lucky to have escaped with their lives." -
This time, however, these public brigands made a mistake.  Gibbon's
son happens to be Lecointre's tenant farmer.  Moreover, it is only
accidentally that he mentions the circumstance to his landlord; "he
came to see him for another purpose." - Cf.  "The Revolution," vol.
II., 302.  (There is a similar scene in the house of one Ruelle, a
farmer, in the commune of Lisse.)

[161] Passim Alfred Lallier, "Le sans-culotte Goullin." - Wallon,
"Histoire du Tribunal révolutionnaire de Paris," V., 368.  (Deposition
of Lacaille.) - In addition to this, the most extraordinary monsters
are met with in other administrative bodies, for example, in Nantes, a
Jean d'Héron, tailor, who becomes inspector of military stores.
"After the rout at Clisson, says the woman Laillet, he appeared in the
popular club with a brigand's ear attached to his hat by way of
cockade.  His pockets were full of ears, which he took delight in
making the women kiss.  He exposed other things which he made them
kiss and the woman Laillet adds certain details which I dare not
transcribe." (" Le patriote d'Héron," by L.  de la Sicotière, pp.9 and
10.  Deposition of the woman Laillet, fish-dealer, also the testimony
of Mellinet, vol.  VIII., p.256.)

[162] Wallon, V., 368.  (Deposition of de Laillet.)

[163] Ibid., V., 37'.  (Deposition of Tabouret.)

[164] Ibid., V., 373.  (Deposition of Mariotte.)

[165] Monieur, XXII., 321.  (Deposition of Philippe Troncjolly.) -
Berryat Saint-Prix, "La Justice Révolutionnaire," 39.

[166] Campardon, "Histoire du Tribunal Révolutionnaire," II., 30.
They have ten francs a day, and full powers conferred on them.
(Orders of Carrier and Francastel, October 28, 1793.) "The
representatives.  .  .  .  confer collectively and individually, on
each member of the revolutionary company, the right of surveillance
over all 'suspect' citizens in Nantes, over strangers who come to or
reside there, over monopolists of every sort.  .  .  .  The right to
make domiciliary visits wherever they may deem it advisable.  .  .  .
The armed force will everywhere respond to the demands made upon it in
the name of the company, or of any individual member composing it." -
Berryat Saint-Prix, p.  42.  - Alfred Lallier, " Les Noyades de
Nantes," p.20.  (Deposition of Gauthier.) Ibid., p.22.  "Damn,"
exclaims Carrier, "I kept that execution for Lamberty.  I'm sorry that
it was done by others."

[167] Alfred Lallier, ibid., pp.21 and 90.  - Cf.  Moniteur, XXII.,
331.  (Deposition of Victoire Abraham.) "The drowners made quite free
with the women, even using them for their own purposes when pleased
with them, which women, in token of their kindness, enjoyed the
precious advantage of not being drowned."

[168] Campardon, II., 8.  (Deposition of Commeret.) - Berryat Saint-
Prix, p.  42.-Ibid., p.28.  Other agents of Carrier, Fouquet and
Lamberty, were condemned specially, "for having saved from national
vengeance Madame de Martilly and her maid .  .  .  They shared the
woman Martilly and the maid between them." In connection with the
"dainty taste" of Jacobins for silk dresses M. Berryat Saint-Prix
cites the following answer of a Jacobin of 1851 to the judge
d'instruction of Rheims; on the objection being made to him that the
Republic, as he understood it, could not last long, he replied:
"Possibly, but say it lasts three months.  That's long enough to fill
one's pocket and belly and rumple silk dresses?" Another of the same
species said in 1871: "We shall anyhow have a week's use of it."
Observers of human nature will find analogous details in the history
of the Sepoy rebellion in India against the English in 1803, also in
the history of the Indians in the United States.  The September
massacres in Paris and the history of the combat of 1791 and 1792 have
already provided us with the same characteristic documents.

[169] Alfred Lallier, "Les Fusillades de Nantes," P.23.  (Depositions
of Picard, commander of the National Guards of the escort.  - Cf.  the
depositions of Jean Jounet, paver, and of Henri Ferdinand, joiner.)

[170] Sauzay, "Histoire de la Persécution Révolutionnaire dans le
Département du Doubs," VII., 687.  (Letter of Grégoire, December 24,
1796.) "An approximative calculation makes the number of the authors
of so many crimes three hundred thousand, for in each commune there
were about five or six of these ferocious brutes who, named Brutus,
perfected the art of removing seals, drowning and cutting throats.
They consumed immense amounts in constructing 'Mountains,' in
reveling, and in fetes every three months which, after the first
parade, became parodies, represented by three or four actors in them,
and with no audience.  These consisted, finally, of a drum-beater and
the musical officer; and the latter, ashamed of himself, often
concealed his scarf in his pocket, on his way to the Temple of Reason.
.  .  .  But these 300 000 brigands had 2 or 300 directors, members of
the National convention, who cannot be called anything but scoundrels,
since the language provides no other epithet so forcible."


BOOK FOURTH.   The Governed.

CHAPTER I.  The Oppressed.

I.     Revolutionary Destruction.

Magnitude of revolutionary destructiveness.  - The four ways of
effecting it.  - Expulsion from the country through forced emigration
and legal banishment.  - Number of those expelled.  - Privation of
liberty.  - Different sorts of imprisonment.  - Number and situation
of those imprisoned.  - Murders after being tried, or without trial.
- Number of those guillotined or shot after trial.  - Indication of
the number of other lives destroyed.  - Necessity and plan for wider
destruction.  - Spoliation.  - Its extent.  - Squandering.  - Utter
losses.  - Ruin of individuals and the State.  - The Notables the most
oppressed.

The object of the Jacobin, first of all, is the destruction of his
adversaries, avowed or presumed, probable or possible.  Four violent
measures concur, together or in turn, to bring about the physical or
social extermination of all Frenchmen who no longer belong to the sect
or the party.

The first operation consists in expelling them from the territory.  -
Since 1789, they have been chased off through a forced emigration;
handed over to jacqueries, or popular uprisings, in the country, and
to insurrections in the cities,[1] defenseless and not allowed to
defend themselves, three-fourths of them have left France, simply to
escape popular brutalities against which neither the law nor the
government afforded them any protection.  According as the law and the
administration, in becoming more Jacobin, became more hostile to them,
so did they leave in greater crowds.  After the 10th of August and 2nd
of September, the flight necessarily was more general; for,
henceforth, if any one persisted in remaining after that date it was
with the almost positive certainty that he would be consigned to a
prison, to await a massacre or the guillotine.  About the same time,
the law added to the fugitive the banished, all unsworn priests,
almost an entire class consisting of nearly 40 000 persons.[2] It is
calculated that, on issuing from the reign of Terror, the total number
of fugitives and banished) amounted to 150 000[3] the list would have
been still larger, had not the frontier been guarded by patrols and
one had to cross it at the risk of one's life; and yet, many do risk
their lives in attempting to cross it, in disguise, wandering about at
night, in mid-winter, exposed to gunshots, determined to escape cost
what it will, into Switzerland, Italy, or Germany, and even into
Hungary, in quest of security and the right of praying to God as one
pleases.[4] - If any exiled or deported person ventures to return, he
is tracked like a wild beast, and, as soon as taken, he is
guillotined.[5] For example, M. de Choiseul, and other unfortunates,
wrecked and cast ashore on the coast of Normandy, are not sufficiently
protected by the law of nations.  They are brought before a military
commission; saved temporarily through public commiseration, they
remain in prison until the First Consul intervenes between them and
the homicidal law and consents, through favor, to deport them to the
Dutch frontier.  - If they have taken up arms against the Republic
they are cut off from humanity; a Pandour[6] taken prisoner is treated
as a man; an émigré made prisoner is treated like a wolf - they shoot
him on the spot.  In some cases, even the pettiest legal formalities
are dispensed with.
 "When I am lucky enough to catch 'em," writes Gen.  Vandamme, "I do
not trouble the military commission to try them.  They are already
tried - my saber and pistols do their business."[7]

The second operation consists in depriving "suspects" of their
liberty, of which deprivation there are several degrees; there are
various ways of getting hold of people.  - Sometimes, the "suspect" is
"adjourned," that is to say, the order of arrest is simply suspended;
he lives under a perpetual menace that is generally fulfilled; he
never knows in the morning that he will not sleep in a prison that
night.  Sometimes, he is put on the limits of his commune.  Sometimes,
he is confined to his house with or without guards, and, in the former
case, he is obliged to pay them.  Again, finally, and which occurs
most frequently, he is shut up in this or that common jail.  - In the
single department of Doubs, twelve hundred men and women are
"adjourned;" three hundred put on the limits of the commune, fifteen
hundred confined to their houses, and twenty two hundred
imprisoned.[8] In Paris, thirty-six such prisons and more than
"violins", or temporary jails, soon filled by the revolutionary
committees, do not suffice for the service.[9] It is estimated that,
in France, not counting more than 40,000 provisional jails, twelve
hundred prisons, full and running over, contain each more than two
hundred inmates.[10]  At Paris, notwithstanding the daily void created
by the guillotine, the number of the imprisoned on Floréal 9, year
II., amounts to 7,840; and, on Messidor 25 following, notwithstanding
the large batches of 50 and 60 persons led in one day, and every day,
to the scaffold, the number is still 7,502.[11] There are more than
one thousand persons in the prisons of Arras, more than one thousand
five hundred in those of Toulouse, more than three thousand in those
of Strasbourg, and more than thirteen thousand in those of Nantes.  In
the two departments alone of Bouches du-Rhône and Vaucluse,
Representative Maignet, who is on the spot, reports from 12,000 to
15,000 arrests.[12]  "A little before Thermidor," says Representative
Beaulieu, "the number of incarcerated arose to nearly 400,000, as is
apparent on the lists and registers then before the Committee of
General Security."[13] -  Among these poor creatures, there are
children, and not alone in the prisons of Nantes where the
revolutionary searches have collected the whole of the rural
population; in the prisons of Arras, among twenty similar cases, I
find a coal-dealer and his wife with their seven sons and daughters,
from seventeen down to six years of age; a widow with her four
children from nineteen down to twelve years of age; another noble
widow with her nine children, from seventeen down to three years of
age, and six children, without father or mother, from twenty-three
down to nine years of age.[14] - These prisoners of State were
treated, almost everywhere, worse than robbers and assassins under the
ancient régime.  They began by subjecting them to rapiotage, that is
to say, stripping them naked or, at best, feeling their bodies under
their shirts; women and young girls fainted away under this
examination, formerly confined to convicts on entering the bagnio.[15]
- Frequently, before consigning them to their dungeons or shutting
them up in their cells, they would be left two or three nights pell-
mell in a lower hall on benches, or in the court on the pavement,
"without beds or straw." "The feelings are wounded in all directions,
every point of sensibility, so to say, being played upon.  They are
deprived one after the other of their property, assignats, furniture,
and food, of daylight and lamp-light, of the assistance which their
wants and infirmities demand, of a knowledge of public events, of all
communication, either immediate or written, with fathers, sons and
husbands."[16] They are obliged to pay for their lodgings, their
keepers, and for what they eat; they are robbed at their very doors of
the supplies they send for outside; they are compelled to eat at a
mess-table; they are furnished with scant and nauseous food, "spoilt
codfish, putrid herrings and meat, rotten vegetables, all this
accompanied with a mug of Seine water colored red with some drug or
other."[17] They starve them, bully them, and vex them purposely as if
they meant to exhaust their patience and drive them into a revolt, so
as to get rid of them in a mass, or, at least, to justify the
increasing rapid strokes of the guillotine.  They are huddled together
in tens, twenties and thirties, in one room at La Force, "eight in a
chamber, fourteen feet square," where all the beds touch, and many
overlap each other, where two out of the eight inmates are obliged to
sleep on the floor, where vermin swarm, where the closed sky-lights,
the standing tub, and the crowding together of bodies poisons the
atmosphere.  - In many places, the proportion of the sick and dying is
greater than in the hold of a slave-ship.  "Of ninety individuals with
whom I was shut up two months ago," writes a prisoner at Strasbourg,
"sixty-six were taken to the hospital in the space of eight days."[18]
In the prisons of Nantes, 3000 out 13,000 prisoners die of typhoid
fever and of the rot in two months.[19]  400 priests[20] confined on a
vessel between decks, in the roadstead of Aix, stowed on top of each
other, wasted with hunger, eaten up by vermin, suffocated for lack of
air, half-frozen, beaten, mocked at, and constantly threatened with
death, suffer still more than Negroes in a slave-hold; for, through
interest in his freight, the captain of the slaver tries to keep his
human consignment in good health, whilst, through revolutionary
fanaticism, the crew of the Aix vessel detests its cargo of "black-
frocks" and would gladly send them to the bottom.  - According to this
system, which, up to Thermidor 9, grows worse and worse, imprisonment
becomes a torture, oftentimes mortal, slower and more painful than the
guillotine, and to such an extent that, to escape it, Champfort opens
his veins and Condorcet swallows poison.[21]The third expedient
consists of murder, with or without trial.  - 178 tribunals, of which
40 are ambulatory, pronounce in every part of the territory sentences
of death which are immediately executed on the spot.[22]  Between
April 6, 1793, and Thermidor 9, year II., (July 27th, 1794) that of
Paris has 2,625 persons guillotined,[23] while the provincial judges
do as much work as the Paris judges.  In the small town of Orange
alone, they guillotine 331 persons.  In the single town of Arras they
have 299 men and 93 women guillotined.  At Nantes, the revolutionary
tribunals and military committees have, on the average, 100 persons a
day guillotined, or shot, in all 1,971.  In the city of Lyons the
revolutionary committee admit 1,684, while Cadillot, one of
Robespierre's correspondents, advises him of 6,000.[24] - The
statement of these murders is not complete, but 17,000 have been
enumerated,[25] "most of them effected without any formality, evidence
or direct charge," among others the murder of "more than 1200 women,
several of whom were octogenarians and infirm;"[26] particularly the
murder of 60 women or young girls, condemned to death, say the
warrants, for having attended the services of unsworn priests, or for
having neglected the services of a sworn priest.

 "The accused, ranged in order, were condemned at sight.  Hundreds of
death-sentences took about a minute per head.  Children of seven, five
and four years of age, were tried.  A father was condemned for the
son, and the son for the father.  A dog was sentenced to death.  A
parrot was brought forward as a witness.  Numbers of accused persons
whose sentences could not be written out were executed."

 At Angers, the sentences of over four hundred men and three hundred
and sixty women, executed for the purpose of relieving the prisons,
were mentioned on the registers simply by the letters S or G (shot or
guillotined).[27] At Paris, as in the provinces, the slightest
pretext[28] served to constitute a crime.  The daughter of the
celebrated painter, Joseph Vernet,[29] was guillotined for being a "
receiver," for having kept fifty pounds of candles in her house,
distributed among the employees of La Muette by the liquidators of the
civil list.  Young de Maillé,[30] aged sixteen years, was guillotined
as a conspirator, "for having thrown a rotten herring in the face of
his jailer, who had served it to him to eat." Madame de Puy-Verin was
guillotined as "guilty" because she had not taken away from her deaf,
blind and senile husband a bag of card-counters, marked with the royal
effigy.  - In default of any pretext,[31] there was the supposition of
a conspiracy; blank lists were given to paid emissaries, who undertook
to search the various prisons and select the requisite number of
heads; they wrote names down on them according to their fancy, and
these provided the batches for the guillotine.

 "As for myself," said the juryman Vilate, "I am never embarrassed.  I
am always convinced.  In a revolution, all who appear before this
tribunal ought to be condemned." -

 At Marseilles, the Brutus Commission,[32] "sentencing without public
prosecutor or jurymen, sent to the prisons for those it wished to put
to death.  After having demanded their names, professions and wealth
they were sent down to a cart standing at the door of the Palais de
Justice; the judges then stepped out on the balcony and pronounced the
death-sentence." The same proceedings took place at Cambrai, Arras,
Nantes, Le Mans, Bordeaux, Nîmes, Lyons, Strasbourg, and elsewhere.  -
Evidently, the judicial comedy is simply a parade; they make use of it
as one of the respectable means, among others less respectable, to
exterminate people whose opinions are not what they should be, or who
belong to the proscribed classes;[33] Samson, at Paris, and his
colleagues in the provinces, the execution-platoons of Lyons and
Nantes, are simply the collaborators of murderers properly so called,
while legal massacres complete other massacres pure and simple.

Of this latter description, the fusillades of Toulon come first, where
the number of those who are shot largely surpasses one thousand;[34]
next the great drownings of Nantes, in which 4,800 men, women and
children perished,[35] the other drownings, for which no figures may
be given;[36] then the countless popular murders committed in France
between July 14, 1789, and August 10, 1792; the massacre of one 1,300
prisoners in Paris, in September, 1792; the long train of
assassinations which, in July, August and September, 1789, extends
over the entire territory; finally, the dispatch of the prisoners,
either shot or sabered, without trial at Lyons and in the West.  Even
excepting those who had died fighting or who, taken with arms in their
hands, were shot down or sabered on the spot, there were 10,000
persons slaughtered without trial in the province of Anjou alone:[37]
accordingly, the instructions of the Committee of Public Safety, also
the written orders of Carrier and Francastel, direct generals to
"bleed freely" the insurgent districts,[38] and spare not a life: it
is estimated that, in the eleven western departments, the dead of both
sexes and of all ages exceeded 400,000.[39] - Considering the program
and principles of the Jacobin sect this is no great number; they might
have killed a good many more.  But time was wanting; during their
short reign they did what they could with the instrument in their
hands.  Look at their machine, the gradual construction of its parts,
the successive stages of its operation from its starting up to
Thermidor 9, and see how limited the period of its operation was.
Organized March 30 and April 6, 1793, the Revolutionary Committees and
the Revolutionary Tribunal had but seventeen months in which to do
their work.  They did not drive ahead with all their might until after
the fall of the Girondists, and especially after September, 1763 that
is to say for a period of eleven months.  Its loose wheels were not
screwed up and the whole was not in running order under the impulse of
the central motor until after December, 1793, that is to say during
eight months.  Perfected by the law of Prairial 22, it works for the
past two months, faster and better than before, with an energy and
rapidity that increase from week to week.  - At that date, and even
before it, the theorists have taken the bearings of their destinies
and accepted the conditions of their undertaking.  Being sectarians,
they have a faith, and as orthodoxy tolerates no heresy, and as the
conversion of heretics is never sincere or durable, heresy can be
suppressed only by suppressing heretics.  "It is only the dead," said
Barère, Messidor 16, "who never return." On the 2nd and 3rd of
Thermidor,[40] the Committee of Public Safety sends to Fouquier-
Tinville a list of four hundred and seventy-eight accused persons with
orders "to bring the parties named to trial at once." Baudot and Jean
Bon St.  Andre, Carrier, Antonelle and Guifroy, had already estimated
the lives to be taken at several millions and, according to Collot d'
Herbois, who had a lively imagination, "the political perspiration
should go on freely, and not stop until from twelve to fifteen million
Frenchmen had been destroyed."[41]

To make amends, in the fourth and last division of their work, that is
to say, in spoliation, they went to the last extreme: they did all
that could be done to ruin individuals, families and the State;
whatever could be taken, they took.  - The Constituent and Legislative
Assemblies had, on their side, begun the business by abolishing tithes
and all feudal rights without indemnity, and by confiscating all
ecclesiastical property; the Jacobin operators continue and complete
the job; we have seen by what decrees and with what hostility against
collective and individual property, whether they attribute to the
State the possession of all corporations whatever, even laic, such as
colleges, schools and scientific or literary societies, hospitals and
communes, or whether they despoil individuals, indirectly through
assignats and the maximum, or directly through the forced loan,
revolutionary taxes,[42] seizures of gold and silver coin,
requisitions of common useful utensils,[43] sequestrations of
prisoners' property, confiscations of the possessions of emigrants and
exiles and of those deported or condemned to death.  No capital
invested in real or personal property, no income in money or produce,
whatever its source, whether leases, mortgages, private credits,
pensions, agricultural, industrial or commercial gains, the fruits of
economy or labor, from the farmers', the manufacturers' and the
merchant's stores to the robes, coats, shirts and shoes, even to the
beds and bed-rooms of private individuals - nothing escapes their
rapacious grasp: in the country, they carry off even seed reserved for
planting; at Strasbourg and in the Upper Rhine, all kitchen utensils;
in Auvergne and elsewhere, even the shepherd's pots.  Every object of
value, even those not in public use, comes under requisition: for
instance,[44] the Revolutionary Committee of Bayonne seizes a lot of
"cotton cloth and muslin," under the pretext of making "breeches for
the country's defenders." On useful objects being taken it is not
always certain that they will be utilized; between their seizure and
putting them to service, robbery and waste intervene.  At
Strasbourg,[45] on a requisition being threatened by the
representatives, the inhabitants strip themselves and, in a few days,
bring to the municipality "6,879 coats, breeches and vests, 4,767
pairs of stockings, 16,921 pairs of shoes, 863 pairs of boots, 1351
cloaks, 20,518 shirts, 4,524 hats, 523 pairs of gaiters, 143 skin
vests, 2,673, 900 blankets, besides 29 quintals of lint, 21 quintals
of old linen, and a large number of other articles."

But "most of these articles remain piled up in the storehouses, part
of them rotten, or eaten by rats, the rest being abandoned to the
first-comer.  .  .  .  The end of spoliation was attained." - Utter
loss to individuals and no gain, or the minimum of a gain, to the
State.  Such is the net result of the revolutionary government.  After
having laid its hand on three-fifths of the landed property of France;
after having wrested from communities and individuals from ten to
twelve billions of real and personal estate; after having increased,
through assignats and territorial warrants, the public debt, which was
not five billions in 1789, to more than fifty billions;[46] no longer
able to pay its employees; reduced to supporting its armies as well as
itself by forced contributions on conquered territories, it ends in
bankruptcy; it repudiates two-thirds of its debt, and its credit is so
low that the remaining third which it has consolidated and guaranteed
afresh, loses eighty-three per cent.  the very next day.  In its
hands, the State has itself suffered as much as the private
individuals.  - Of the latter, more than 1 200 000 have suffered
physically: several millions, all who owned anything, great or small,
have suffered through their property.[47] But, in this multitude of
the oppressed, it is the notables who are chiefly aimed at and who, in
their possessions as well as in their persons, have suffered the most.



II.    The Value of Notables in Society.

Various kinds and degrees of Notables in 1789.  - The great social
staff.  - Men of the world.  - Their breeding.  - Their intellectual
culture.  - Their humanity and philanthropy.  - Their moral temper.  -
Practical men.  - Where recruited, - Their qualifications.  - Their
active benevolence.  - Scarcity of them and their worth to a
community.

On estimating the value of a forest you begin by dividing its
vegetation into two classes; on the one hand the full-grown trees, the
large or medium-sized oaks, beeches and aspens, and, on the other, the
saplings and the undergrowth.  In like manner, in estimating society,
you divide the individuals composing it into two groups, one
consisting of its notables of every kind and degree, and the other, of
the common run of men.  If the forest is an old one and has not been
too badly managed, nearly the whole of its secular growth is found in
its clusters of full-grown trees.  Nearly all the useful wood is to be
found in the mature forest.  A few thousand large handsome trees and
the three or four hundred thousand saplings, young and old, of the
reserve, contain more useful and valuable wood than the twenty or
thirty millions shrubs, bushes and heathers put together.  It is the
same in a community which has existed for a long time under a
tolerably strict system of justice and police; almost the entire gain
of a secular civilization is found concentrated in its notables,
which, taking it all in all, was the state of French society in
1789.[48]

Let us first consider the most prominent personages.   - It is
certain, that, among the aristocracy, the wealthiest and most
conspicuous families had ceased to render services proportionate to
the cost of their maintenance.  Most of the seigniors and ladies of
the Court, the worldly bishops, abbés, and parliamentarians of the
drawing-room, knew but little more than how to solicit with address,
make a graceful parade of themselves and spend lavishly.  An ill-
understood system of culture had diverted them from their natural
avocations, and converted them into showy and agreeable specimens of
vegetation, often hollow, blighted, sapless and over-pruned, besides
being very costly, over-manured and too freely watered; and the
skillful gardening which shaped, grouped and arranged them in
artificial forms and bouquets, rendered their fruit abortive that
flowers might be multiplied.  - But the flowers were exquisite, and
even in a moralist's eyes, such flowering counts for something.  On
the side of civility, good-breeding and deportment, the manners and
customs of high life had reached a degree of perfection, which never,
in France or elsewhere, had been attained before, and which has never
since been revived;[49] and of all the arts through which men have
emancipated themselves from primitive coarseness, that which teaches
them mutual consideration is, perhaps, the most precious.  The
observance of this, not alone in the drawing-room, but in the family,
in business, in the street, with regard to relatives, inferiors,
servants and strangers, gives dignity, as well as a charm, to human
intercourse.   Delicate regard for what is proper becomes a habit, an
instinct, a second nature, which nature, superimposed on the original
nature, is the best, inasmuch as the internal code which governs each
detail of action and speech, prescribes the standard of behavior and
respect for oneself, as well as respect and refined behavior towards
others.  - To this merit, add mental culture.  Never was there an
aristocracy so interested in general ideas and refinement of
expression; it was even too much so; literary and philosophical
preoccupation excluded all others of the positive and practical order;
they talked, instead of acting.  But, in this limited circle of
speculative reason and of pure literary forms, it excelled; writings
and how to write furnished the ordinary entertainment of polite
society; every idea uttered by a thinker caused excitement in the
drawing-room: the talent and style of authors were shaped by its
taste;[50] it was in the drawing-rooms that Montesquieu, Voltaire,
Rousseau, d'Alembert, the Encyclopedists, great and little,
Beaumarchais, Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, Champfort, and Rivarol,
involuntarily sought listeners and found them, not merely admirers and
entertainers, but friends, protectors, patrons, benefactors and
followers.  - Under the instruction of the masters, the disciples had
become philanthropists; moreover, the amenities of manners developed
in all souls compassion and benevolence: "Nothing was more dreaded by
opulent men than to be regarded as insensitive."[51] They concerned
themselves with children, with the poor, with the peasantry, setting
their wits to work to afford them relief; their zeal was aroused
against oppression, their pity was excited for every misfortune.  Even
those whose duties compelled them to be rigid tempered their rigidity
with explanations or concessions.

"Ten years before the Revolution," says Rderer,[52] "the criminal
courts of France were no longer like before.  .  .  .  Their attitude
had changed.  .   .  All the young magistrates, and this I can bear
witness to, for I was one myself, pronounced judgments more in
accordance with the principles of Beccaria,[53] than according to
law." -

As to the men in authority, military administrators and commandants,
it was impossible to be more patient, more mindful of human blood.
Their qualities turned also here into defects, for, through excess of
humanity, they were unable to maintain order, as is evident when
facing the insurrections that took place between 1789 and 1792.  Even
with the force in their own hands, amidst gross insults and extreme
dangers, they dreaded to make use of it; they could not bring
themselves to repressing brutes, rascals and maniacs: following the
example of Louis XVI., they considered themselves as shepherds of the
people, and let themselves be trampled upon rather than fire upon
their flock.  - In reality, they had noble, and even generous and big
hearts: in the bailiwick assemblies, in March, 1789, long before the
night of August 4, they voluntarily surrendered every pecuniary
privilege; under severe trials, their courage, heightened by polished
manners, adds even to their heroism, elegance, tact and gaiety.  The
most corrupt, a Duke of Orleans, the most frivolous and the most
blasé, a Duc de Biron, meet death with stoical coolness and
disdain.[54] Delicate women who complain of a draught in their
drawing-rooms, make no complaint of a straw mattress in a damp, gloomy
dungeon, where they sleep in their clothes so that they may not wake
up stiffened, and they come down into the court of the Conciergerie
with their accustomed cheerfulness.  Men and women, in prison, dress
themselves as formerly, with the same care, that they may meet and
talk together with the same grace and spirit, in a corridor with an
iron grating within a step of the revolutionary Tribunal, and on the
eve of the scaffold.[55] -- This moral temper is evidently of the
rarest; if it errs on either side it is on that of being too refined,
bad for use, good for ornament.

And yet, in the upper class there were associated with two or three
thousand idlers amongst a frivolous aristocracy, as many serious men,
who, to their drawing-room experience, added experience in business.
Almost all who held office or had been in the service, were of this
number, either ambassadors, general officers or former ministers, from
Marshal de Brogue down to Machaut and Malesherbes; resident bishops,
like Monseigneur de Durfort, at Besançon;[56]  vicars-general and
canons who really governed their dioceses on the spot; prelates, like
those in Provence, Languedoc and Brittany, who, by right, had seats in
the provincial "Etats", agents and representatives of the clergy at
Paris; heads of Orders and Congregations; the chief and lieutenant
commandants of the seventeen military departments, intendants of each
generalité head-clerks of each ministry, magistrates of each
parliament, farmers-general, collectors-general, and, more
particularly in each province, the dignitaries and local proprietors
of the two first orders, and all leading manufacturers, merchants,
ship-owners, bankers and prominent bourgeois; in short, that élite of
the nobles, clergy, and Third Estate, which, from 1778 to 1789,
constituted the twenty-one provincial assemblies, and which certainly
formed in France the great social staff.  - Not that they were
superior politicians: for in those days there were none, scarcely a
few hundred competent men, almost all of them being specialists.
Nevertheless, it was in these few men that nearly the entire political
capacity, information and common sense of France was to be found.
Outside of their heads the other twenty-six millions of brains
contained but little else than dangerous and barren formulas; as they
alone had commanded, negotiated, deliberated and governed, they were
the only ones who understood men and things tolerably well, and,
consequently, the only ones who were not completely disqualified for
their management.  In the provincial Assemblies they were seen
originating and conducting the most important reforms; they had
devoted themselves to these effectively and conscientiously, with as
much equity and patriotism as intelligence and thoroughness; most of
the heads and sub-heads of the leading public and private branches of
the service, guided by philosophy and supported by current opinion for
twenty years, had likewise given evidence of active benevolence.[57] -
Nothing is more precious than men of this stamp, for they are the life
and soul of their respective branches of service, and are not to be
replaced in one lot, at a given moment, by persons of equal merit.  In
diplomacy, in the finances, in judicature, in administration, in
extensive commerce and large manufacturing, a practical, governing
capacity is not created in a day; affairs in all these are too vast
and too complicated; there are too many diverse interests to take into
account, too many near and remote contingencies to foresee; lacking a
knowledge of technical details, it is difficult to grasp the whole;
one tries to make short work of it, one shatters right and left and
ends with the sword, obliged to fall back on systematic brutality to
complete the work of audacious bungling.  Except in war, where
apprenticeship takes less time than elsewhere, ten years of
preparatory education plus ten years of practical experience are
required for the good government of men and the management of capital
assets.  Add to this, against the temptations of power which are
strong, a stability of character established through professional
honor, and, if it so happens, by family traditions.

After having directed financial matters for two years, Cambon[58] is
not yet aware that the functions of the fermiers-généraux of indirect
taxes differ from those of the receveurs-géneraux of direct taxes;[59]
accordingly, he includes, or allows to be included, the forty-eight
receveurs in the decree which sends the sixty fermiers before the
revolutionary Tribunal, that is to say, to the guillotine; and, in
fact, all of them would have been sent there had not a man familiar
with the business, Gaudin, Commissioner of the Treasury, heard the
decree proclaimed in the street and run to explain to the Committee on
Finances that "there was nothing in common" between the two groups of
outlaws; that the fermiers were holders of leases on probable profits
while the receveurs were paid functionaries at a fixed salary, and the
crimes of the former, proved or not proved, were not imputable to the
latter.  Great astonishment on the part of these improvised
financiers! "They make an outcry," says Gaudin, "and assert that I am
mistaken.  I insist, and repeat what I have told the President,
Cambon; I affirm on says to one of the members, 'Since that is so, go
to the bureau of procès-verbaux and scratch out the term receveurs-
généraux from the decree passed this morning.' my honor and offer to
furnish them the proof of it; finally, they are satisfied and the
President " - Such are the gross blunders committed by interlopers,
and even carried out, when not warned and restrained by veterans in
the service.  Cambon, accordingly, in spite of the Jacobins, retains
in his bureaux all whom he can among veteran officials.  If Carnot
manages the war well, it is owing to his being himself an educated
officer and to maintaining in their positions d'Arcon, d'Obenheim, de
Grimoard, de Montalembert and Marescot, all eminent men bequeathed to
him by the ancient régime.[60} Reduced, before the 9th of Thermidor,
to perfect nullity, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is not again to
become useful and active until the professional diplomats, Miot,
Colchen, Otto and Reinhart,[61] resume their ascendancy and influence.
It is a professional diplomat, Barthélemy, who, after the 9th of
Thermidor, really directs the foreign policy of the Convention, and
brings about the peace of Basle.

III.   The three classes of Notables.

The Nobility.  - Its physical and moral preparation through feats of
arms.  - The military spirit.  - High character.  - Conduct of
officers in 1789-1792.  - Service for which these nobles were adapted.

Three classes, the nobles, the clergy and the bourgeoisie, provided
this superior élite, and, compared with the rest of the nation, they
themselves formed an élite.  - Thirty thousand gentlemen, scattered
through the provinces, had been brought up from infancy to the
profession of arms; generally poor, they lived on their rural estates
without luxuries, comforts or curiosity, in the society of wood-
rangers and game-keepers, frugally and with rustic habits, in the open
air, in such a way as to ensure robust constitutions.  A child, at six
years of age, mounted a horse; he followed the hounds, and hardened
himself against inclemencies;[62] afterwards, in the academies, he
rendered his limbs supple by exercise and obtained that rugged health
which is necessary for living under a tent and following a campaign.
From early childhood, he was imbued with a military spirit; his father
and uncles at table talked of nothing but their perils in war and
feats of arms; his imagination took fire; he got accustomed to looking
upon their pursuits as the only ones worthy of a man of rank and
feeling, and he plunged ahead with a precocity which we no longer
comprehend.  I have read many records of the service of gentlemen who
were assassinated, guillotined or emigrés; they nearly always began
their careers before the age of sixteen, often at fourteen, thirteen
and eleven.[63] M. des Echerolles,[64] captain in the Poitou
regiment, had brought along with him into the army his only son, aged
nine, and a dozen little cousins of the same age.  Those children
fought like old soldiers; one of them had his leg fractured by a ball;
young des Echerolles received a saber stroke which cut away his cheek
from the ear to the upper lip, and he was wounded seven times; still
young, he received the cross of St.  Louis.  To serve the State, seek
conflict and expose one's life, seemed an obligation of their rank, a
hereditary debt; out of nine or ten thousand officers who discharged
this debt most of them cared only for this and looked for nothing
beyond.  Without fortune and without influence, they had renounced
promotion, fully aware that the higher ranks were reserved for the
heirs of great families and the courtiers at Versailles.  After
serving fifteen or twenty years, they returned home with a captain's
commission and the cross of St.  Louis, sometimes with a small
pension, contented with having done their duty and conscious of their
own honor.  On the approach of the Revolution, this old spirit,
illumined by the new ideas, became an almost civic virtue:[65] we have
seen how they behaved between 1789 and 1792, their moderation, their
forbearance, their sacrifice of self-love, their abnegation and their
stoical impassability, their dislike to strike, the coolness with
which they persisted in receiving without returning blows, and in
maintaining, if not public order, at least the last semblance of it.
Patriots as much as soldiers, through birth, education and conviction,
they formed a natural, special nursery, eminently worthy of
preserving, inasmuch as it furnished society with ready-made
instruments for defense, internally against rascals and brutes, and
externally against the enemy.  Less calm in disposition and more given
to pleasure than the rural nobles of Prussia, under slacker discipline
and in the midst of greater worldliness, but more genial, more
courteous and more liberal-minded, the twenty-six thousand noble
families of France upheld in their sons the traditions and prejudices,
the habits and aptitudes, those energies of body, heart and mind[66]
through which the Prussian "junkers" were able to constitute the
Prussian army, organize the German army and make Germany the first
power of Europe.

IV.   The Clergy.

Where recruited.  - Professional inducements.  - Independence of
ecclesiastics.  - Their substantial merits.  - Their theoretical and
practical information.  - Their distribution over the territory.  -
Utility of their office.  - Their conduct in 1790-1800.  - Their
courage, their capacity for self-sacrifice.

Likewise in the Church where nearly all its staff, the whole of the
lower and middle-class clergy, curés, vicars, canons and collegiate
chaplains, teachers or directors of schools, colleges and seminaries,
more than sixty-five thousand ecclesiastics, formed a healthy, well
organized body, worthily fulfilling its duties.

"I do not know," says de Tocqueville,[67] "all in all, and
notwithstanding the vices of some of its members, if there ever was in
the world a more remarkable clergy than the Catholic clergy of France
when the Revolution took them by surprise, more enlightened, more
national, less entrenched behind their private virtues, better endowed
with public virtues, and, at the same time, more strong in the faith.
.  .  .  I began the study of the old social system full of prejudices
against them; I finish it full of respect for them."

And first, which is a great point, most of the incumbents in the town
parishes, in the three hundred collegial churches, in the small
canonicates of the cathedral chapters, belonged to better families
than at the present day.[68] Children were then more numerous, not
merely among the peasants, but among the inferior nobles and the upper
bourgeoisie; each family, accordingly, was glad to have one of its
sons take orders, and no constraint was necessary to bring this about.
The ecclesiastical profession then had attractions which it no longer
possesses; it had none of the inconveniences incident to it at the
present time.  A priest was not exposed to democratic distrust and
hostility; he was sure of a bow from the laborer in the street as well
as from the peasant in the country; he was on an equal footing with
the local bourgeoisie, almost one of the family, and among the first;
he could count on passing his life in a permanent situation, honorably
and serenely, in the midst of popular deference and enjoying the good
will of the public.  - On the other hand, he was not bridled as in our
day.  A priest was not a functionary salaried by the State; his pay,
like his private income, earmarked and put aside beforehand, furnished
through special appropriations, through local taxes, out of a distinct
treasury, could never be withheld on account of a préfect's report, or
through ministerial caprice, or be constantly menaced by budget
difficulties and the ill-will of the civil powers.  In relation to his
ecclesiastical superiors he was respectful but independent.  The
bishop in his diocese was not what he has become since the Concordat,
an absolute sovereign free to appoint and remove at will nine curés
out of ten.  In three vacancies out of four, and often in fourteen out
of fifteen,[69] it was not the bishop who made the appointment; the
new incumbent was designated sometimes by the cathedral chapter or
corporation; again, by a collegial church or corporation; again, by
the metropolitan canon or by the abbé or prior, the patron of the
place; again, by the seignior whose ancestors had founded or endowed
the Church; in certain cases by the Pope, and, occasionally, by the
King or commune.  Powers were limited through this multiplicity and
inter-crossing of authorities.  Moreover, the, canon or curé being
once appointed he possessed guarantees; he could not be arbitrarily
dismissed; in most cases, his removal or suspension required a
previous trial according to prescribed formalities, accompanied with
an examination, pleadings, and arguments before the officialité or
ecclesiastical court.  He was, in fact, permanently placed, and very
generally his personal merit sufficed to keep him in his place.  -
For, if the highest positions were bestowed according to birth and
favor, the intermediate positions were reserved to correct habits and
attainments.  Many canons and vicars-general, and almost all the curés
in the towns were doctors of divinity or of canon law, while
ecclesiastical studies, very thorough, had occupied eight or nine
years of their youth.[70]  Although the method was out of date, much
was learned at the Sorbonne and St.  Sulpice; at the very least, one
became a good logician through prolonged and scientific intellectual
gymnastics.  "My dear Abbé," said Turgot, smiling, to Morellet, "it is
only you and I who have taken our degree who can reason closely."
Their theological drill, indeed, was about as valuable as our
philosophical drill; if it expanded the mind less, it supplied this
better with applicable concepts; less exciting, it was more fruitful.
In the Sorbonne of the nineteenth century, the studies consist of the
speculative systems of a few isolated, divergent intellects who have
exercised no authority over the multitude, while in the Sorbonne of
the eighteenth century, the studies consisted of the creed, morality,
discipline, history and canons of a Church which had already existed
seventeen centuries and which, comprising one hundred and fifty
millions of souls, still sways one-half of the civilized world.  - To
a theoretical education add practical education.  A curé and with
still more reason, a canon, an archdeacon, a bishop, was not a passing
stranger, endowed by the State, wearing a surplice, as little
belonging to his age through his ministry as through his dress, and
wholly confined to his spiritual functions: he managed the revenues of
his dotation, he granted leases, made repairs, built, and interested
himself in the probabilities of the crops, in the construction of a
highway or canal, while his experiences in these matters were equal to
those of any lay proprietor.  Moreover, being one of a small
proprietary corporation, that is to say, a chapter or local vestry,
and one of a great proprietary corporation of the diocese and Church
of France, he took part directly or indirectly in important temporal
affairs, in assemblies, in deliberations, in collective expenditures,
in the establishment of a local budget and of a general budget, and
hence, in public and administrative matters, his competence was
analogous and almost equal to that of a mayor, sub-delegate, farmer-
general or intendant.  In addition to this he was liberal: never has
the French clergy been more earnestly so, from the latest curés back
to the first archbishops.[71] - Lastly, remark the distribution of the
clergy over the territory.  There was a curé or vicar in the smallest
of the forty thousand villages.  In thousands of small, poor, remote
communes, he was the only man who could readily read and write; none
other than he in many of the larger rural communes,[72] except the
resident seignior and some man of the law or half-way schoolmaster,
was at all learned.[73]  Actually, for a man who had finished his
studies and knowing Latin, to consent, for six hundred francs or three
hundred francs a year, to live isolated, and a celibate, almost in
indigence, amongst rustics and the poor, he must be a priest; the
quality of his office makes him resigned to the discomforts of his
situation.  A preacher of the Word, a professor of morality, a
minister of Charity, a guide and dispenser of spiritual life, he
taught a theory of the world, at once consoling and self-denying,
which he enforced with a cult, and this cult was the only one adapted
to his flock; manifestly, the French, especially those devoted to
manual and hard labor, could not regard this world as ideal, except
through his formulas; history, the supreme judge, had on this point
rendered its verdict without appeal; no heresy, no schism, not the
Reformation nor Jansenism, had prevailed against hereditary faith;
through infinitely multiplied and deeply penetrating roots this faith
suited national customs, temperament, and peculiar social imagination
and sensibility.  Possessing the heart, the intellect, and even the
senses, through fixed, immemorial traditions and habits, it had become
an unconscious, almost corporeal necessity, and the Catholic orthodox
curé, in communion with the Pope, was about as indispensable to the
village as the public fountain; he also quenched thirst, the thirst of
the soul; without him, the inhabitants could find no drinkable water.
And, if we keep human weaknesses in mind, it may be said that
nobleness of character in the clergy corresponded with nobleness of
profession; in all points no one could dispute their capacity for
self-sacrifice, for they willingly suffered for what they believed to
be the truth.  If, in 1790, a number of priests took the oath to the
civil constitution of the clergy, it was with reservations, or because
they deemed the oath licit; but, after the dismissal of the bishops
and the Pope's disapprobation, many of them withdrew it at the risk of
their lives, so as not to fall into schism; they fell back into the
ranks and gave themselves up voluntarily to the brutality of the crowd
and the rigors of the law.  Moreover, and from the start,
notwithstanding threats and temptations, two-thirds of the clergy
would not take the oath; in the highest ranks, among the mundane
ecclesiastics whose skepticism and laxity were notorious, honor, in
default of faith, maintained the same spirit; nearly the whole of
them, great and small, had subordinated their interests, welfare and
security to the maintenance of their dignity or to scruples of
conscience.  They had allowed themselves to be stripped of everything;
they let themselves be exiled, imprisoned, tortured and made martyrs
of, like the Christians of the primitive church; through their
invincible meekness, they were going, like the primitive Christians,
to exhaust the rage of their executioners, wear out persecutions,
transform opinion and compel the admission, even with those who
survived in the eighteenth century, that they were true, deserving and
courageous men.

V.    The Bourgeoisie.

Where recruited.  - Difference between the functionary of the ancient
regime and the modern functionary.  - Appointments seen as Property.
- Guilds.  - Independence and security of office-holders.  - Their
ambitions are limited and satisfied.  - Fixed habits, seriousness and
integrity.  - Ambition to secure esteem.  - Intellectual culture.  -
Liberal ideas.  - Respectability and public zeal.  - Conduct of the
bourgeoisie in 1789-1791.

Below the nobles and the clergy, a third class of notables, the
bourgeoisie, almost entirely confined to the towns,[74] verged on the
former classes through its upper circles, while its diverse groups,
ranging from the parliamentarian to the rich merchant or manufacturer,
comprised the remainder of those who were tolerably well educated, say
100 000 families, recruited on the same conditions as the bourgeoisie
of the present day: they were "bourgeois living nobly," meaning by
this, living on their incomes, large manufacturers and traders,
engaged in liberal pursuits-lawyers, notaries, procureurs, physicians,
architects, engineers, artists, professors, and especially the
government officials; the latter, however, very numerous, differed
from ours in two essential points.  On the one hand, their office, as
nowadays with the notaries' étude, or a membership of the stock-board,
was personal property.  Their places, and many others, such as posts
in the judiciary, in the finances, in bailiwicks, in the Présidial, in
the Election,[75] in the salt-department, in the customs, in the Mint,
in the department of forests and streams, in presidencies, in
councils, as procureurs du roi in various civil, administrative and
criminal courts, holding places in the treasury, auditors and
collectors of the various branches of the revenue - all of which
offices, and many others, had been alienated for more than a century
by the State in return for specified sums of ready money; thenceforth,
they fell into the hands of special purchasers; the title of each
possessor was as good as that of a piece of real property, and he
could legally sell his title, the same as he had bought it, at a given
price, on due advertisement![76]  On the other hand, the different
groups of local functionaries in each town formed their own
associations, similar to our notarial chambers, or those of our stock-
brokers; these small associations had their own by-laws, meetings and
treasury, frequently a civil status and the right of pleading, often a
political status and the right of electing to the municipal
council;[77] consequently, besides his personal interests, each member
cherished the professional interests of his guild.  Thus was his
situation different from what it now is, and, through a natural
reaction, his character, manners and tastes were different.  First, he
was much more independent; he was not afraid of being discharged or
transferred elsewhere, suddenly, unawares, on the strength of an
intendant's report, for political reasons, to make room for a deputy's
candidate or a minister's tool.  This would have cost too much it
would have required first of all a reimbursement of the sum paid for
his office, and at a rate of purchase ten times, at least, the revenue
of the office.[78]  Besides, in defending himself, in protesting
against and forestalling his disgrace, he would have been supported by
his entire professional guild, oftentimes by other similar bodies, and
frequently by the whole town, filled with his relations, clients and
comrades.  The entire hive protected the bee against the caprices of
favoritism and the brutalities of despotism.  At Paris, a certain
procureur, supported by his colleagues, is known to have imposed on a
noble who had insulted him, the most humiliating atonement.[79]  In
fact, under the ancient régime, it was almost impossible for a
functionary to be removed; hence, he could fulfill his duties securely
and with dignity, without being obliged to keep daily watch of the
capital, of going to Paris to see how the official wind blew, to look
after all the influences in his favor, to nurse his relations with the
government and live like a bird on a branch.  - In the second place,
there was a limit to his ambition; he did not keep constantly thinking
of mounting a step higher in the hierarchy; or how to pass from a
small town to a large one and hold on to his title; this would have
been a too troublesome and complicated matter; he would first have had
to find a purchaser and then sell his place, and next find a seller
and buy another at a higher price; a stock broker at Bordeaux, a
notary at Lyons, is not an aspirant for the post of stock broker or
notary at Paris.  - Nothing then bore any resemblance to the itinerant
groups of functionaries of the present day which, in obedience to
orders from above, travels about governing each of our towns,
strangers on the wing, with no personal standing, without local landed
property, interests or means, encamped in some hired apartment, often
in a furnished room, sometimes stopping at a hotel, eternal nomads
awaiting a telegram, always prepared to pack up and leave for another
place a hundred leagues off in consideration of a hundred crowns extra
pay, and doing the same detached work over again.  Their predecessor,
belonging to the country, was a stable fixture and contented; he was
not tormented by a craving for promotion; he had a career within the
bounds of his corporation and town; cherishing no wish or idea of
leaving it, he accommodated himself to it; he became proud of his
office and professional brethren, and rose above the egoism of the
individual; his self-love was bent on maintaining every prerogative
and interest belonging to his guild.  Established for life in his
native town, in the midst of old colleagues, numerous relatives and
youthful companions, he esteemed their good opinion.  Exempt from
vexatious or burdensome taxes, tolerably well off, owning at least his
own office, he was above sordid preoccupations and common necessities.
Used to old fashioned habits of simplicity, soberness and economy, he
was not tormented by a disproportion between his income and expenses,
by the requirements of show and luxury, by the necessity of annually
adding to his revenue.  - Thus guided and free, the instincts of
vanity and generosity, the essence of French character, took the
ascendant; the councilor or comptroller, the King's agent, regarded
himself as a man above the common run, as a noble of the Third-Estate;
he thought less of making money than of gaining esteem; his chief
desire was to be honored and honorable; "he passed life comfortably
and was looked up to, .  .  .  in the discharge of his duty, .  .  .
with no other ambition than to transmit to his children .  .  .  .
along with their inheritance an unsullied reputation."[80]   Among the
other groups of the bourgeoisie the same corporate system, the same
settled habits, the same security, the same frugality, the same
institutions, the same customs,[81] promoted the growth of nearly the
same sentiments, while the intellectual culture of these men was not
insignificant.  Having leisure, they were given to reading; as they
were not overwhelmed with newspapers they read books worth reading; I
have found in old libraries in the provinces, in the houses of the
descendants of a manufacturer or lawyer in a small town, complete
editions of Voltaire, Rousseau, Montesquieu, Buffon and Condillac,
with marks in each volume showing that the volume had been read by
someone in the house before the close of the eighteenth century.
Nowhere else, likewise, had all that was sound and liberal in the
philosophy of the eighteenth century found such a welcome; it is from
this class that the patriots of 1789 were recruited; it had furnished
not only the majority of the Constituent Assembly, but again all the
honest men who, from July, 1789 to the end of 1791 performed their
administrative duties so disinterestedly, and with such devotion and
zeal, amidst so many difficulties, dangers and disappointments.
Composed of Feuillants or Monarchists, possessing such types of men as
Huez of Troyes or Dietrich of Strasbourg, and for representatives such
leaders as Lafayette and Bailly, it comprised the superior
intelligence and most substantial integrity of the Third-Estate.  It
is evident that, along with the nobles and clergy, the best fruits of
history were gathered in it, and most of the mental and moral capital
accumulated, not only by the century, but, again, by preceding
centuries.

VI.   The Demi-notables.

Where recruited.  - Village and trade syndics.  - Competency of their
electors.  - Their interest in making good selections.  - Their
capacity and integrity.  - The sorting of men under the ancient
regime.  - Conditions of a family's maintenance and advancement.  -
Hereditary and individual right of the Notable to his property and
rank.

Like a fire lit on a hilltop overlooking a cold and obscure
countryside, a civilization, kept alive with much expense on peaks in
a sea of human barbarity, radiating while its rays grow dim; its light
and warmth fading just as its gleams reach remoter and deeper strata.
Nevertheless, both penetrate yet sufficiently far and deep before
wholly dying out.  If we want to appraise their power in France at the
close of the eighteenth century we must add to the notables the half-
notables of society, namely, the men who, like the people, were
devoted to manual labor, but who, among the people, led the way, say
one hundred and fifty thousand families, consisting of well-to-do
farmers, small rural proprietors, shopkeepers, retailers, foremen and
master-workmen, village syndics and guild syndics,[82] those who were
established and had some capital, owning a plot of land and a house,
with a business or stock of tools, and a set of customers, that is to
say, with something ahead and credit, not being obliged to live from
hand to mouth, and therefore, beginning to be independent and more
influential, in short, the overseers of the great social work-house,
the sergeants and corporals of the social army.  - They, too, were not
unworthy of their rank.  In the village or trade community, the
syndic, elected by his equals and neighbors, was not blindly
nominated; all his electors in relation to him were competent; if
peasants, they had seen him turning up the soil; if blacksmiths or
joiners, they had seen him at work in his forge, or at the bench.
And, as their direct, present and obvious interests were concerned,
they chose him for the best, not on the strength of a newspaper
recommendation, in deference to a vague declamatory platform or
sounding, empty phrases, but according to their personal experiences,
and the thorough knowledge they had of him.  The man sent by the
village to represent them to the intendant and selected by the guild
to sit in the town council, was its most capable, and most creditable
man, one of those, probably, who, through his application,
intelligence, honesty and economy, had proved the most prosperous,
some master-workman or farmer that had gained experience through long
years of assiduity, familiar with details and precedents, of good
judgment and repute, more interested than anybody else in supporting
the interests of the community and with more leisure than others to
attend to public affairs.[83] This man, through the nature of things,
imposed himself on the attention, confidence, and deference of his
peers, and, because he was their natural representative, he was their
legal representative.

Upon the whole, if, in this old society, the pressure was unequally
distributed, if the general equilibrium was unstable, if the upper
parts bore down too heavily on the lower ones, the sorting, at least,
which goes on in every civilized State, constantly separating the
wheat from the chaff, went on tolerably well; except at the center and
at the Court, where the winnowing machine had worked haphazard and,
frequently, in an opposite sense for a century, the separation
proceeded regularly, undoubtedly slower, but, perhaps, more equitably
than in our contemporary democracy.  The chance that a notable by
right could become a notable de facto was then much greater: it was
less difficult, and the inclination to found, maintain and perpetuate
a family or a business was much stronger; people looked more often
beyond themselves; the eyes naturally turned outside the narrow circle
of one's personality, looking backward as well as beyond this present
life.  The (later) institution of an equal partition of property, the
(later) system of obligatory partition and the rule of partition in
kind, with other prescriptions of the (new) civil code, did not split
up an heritage and ruin the home.[84] Parental negligence and the
children's lack of respect and consideration had not yet upset the
authority and abolished respect in the family.  Useful and natural
associations were not yet stifled in the germ nor arrested in their
development by the systematic hostility of the law.  The ease and
cheapness of transportation, the promiscuity of schools, the
excitement of competition, everyone's rush to placement and office,
the increasing excitement of ambition and greed, had not (yet)
immeasurably multiplied the class of irresponsible malcontents and
mischievous nomads.  In the political order of things, inaptitude,
envy, brutality were not sovereign; universal suffrage did not exclude
from power the men, born, bred and qualified to exercise it; countless
public posts were not offered as a prey to charlatanism and to the
intrigues of politicians.  France was not then, as now-a-days, on a
way to become a vast lodging-house administered by casual managers,
condemned to periodical failures, inhabited by anonymous residents,
indifferent to each other, lacking local ties, lacking engagements and
having no corporate loyalties, merely tenants and passing consumers,
placed in numerical order around a common mess-table where each thinks
only of himself, gets served quickly, consumes what he can lay his
hands on, and ends by finding out that, in a place of this sort, the
best condition, the wisest course, is to put all one's property into
an annuity and live a bachelor.  - Formerly, among all classes and in
all the provinces, there were a large number of families that had
taken root on the spot, living there a hundred years and more.  Not
only among the nobles, but among the bourgeoisie and the Third-Estate,
the heir of any enterprise was expected to continue his calling.  This
was so with the seignorial chateau and extensive domain, as with the
bourgeois dwelling and patrimonial office, the humble rural domain,
farm, shop and factory, all were transmitted intact from one
generation to another.[85] Great or small, the individual was not
exclusively interested in himself; his thoughts also traveled forward
to the future and back to the past, on the side of ancestors and on
that of descendants, along the endless chain of which his own life was
but a link; he possessed traditions, he felt bound to set examples.
Under this twofold title, his domestic authority was uncontested;[86]
his household and all his employees followed his instructions without
swerving and without resistance.  When, by virtue of this domestic
discipline, a family had maintained itself upright and respected on
the same spot for a century, it could easily advance a degree; it
could introduce one of its members into the upper class, pass from the
plow or trade to petty offices, and from these to the higher ones and
to parliamentary dignities, from the four thousand posts that ennoble
to the legalized nobility, from the lately made nobles to the old
nobility.  Apart from the two or three thousand gilded drones living
on the public honey at Versailles, apart from the court parasites and
their valets, three or four hundred thousand notables and half-
notables of France thus acquired and kept their offices, consideration
and fortune; they were therefore their legitimate possessors.  The
peasant-proprietor and master-artisan had risen from father to son, at
four o'clock in the morning, toiled all day and never drank.  From
father to son, the trader, notary, lawyer and office-holder, had been
careful, economical, skillful and attentive to business, correct in
their papers, precise in their accounts.  From father to son, the
nobleman had served bravely, the parliamentarian had judged equitably,
as a point of honor, with a salary inferior to the interest of the sum
paid by him to acquire his rank or post.  Each of these men received
no more than his due; his possessions and his rank were the savings of
his ascendants, the price of social services rendered by the long file
of deserving dead, all that his ancestors, his father and himself had
created or preserved of any stable value; each piece of gold that
remained in the hereditary purse represented the balance of a
lifetime, the enduring labor of some one belonging to his line, while
among these gold pieces, he himself had provided his share.  - For,
personal services counted, even among the upper nobility; and all the
more among the lower class, in the Third-Estate, and among the people.
Among the notables of every degree just described, most of them, in
1789, were fully grown men, many of them mature, a goodly number
advanced in years, and some quite aged; consequently, in justification
of his rank and emoluments, or of his gains and his fortune, each
could allege fifteen, twenty, thirty and forty years of labor and
honorability in private or public situations, the grand-vicar of the
diocese as well as the chief-clerk of the ministry, the intendant of
the généralité as well as the president of the royal tribunal, the
village curé, the noble officer, the office-holder, the lawyer, the
procureur, the large manufacturer, the wholesale dealer, as well as
the well-to-do farmer, and the well-known handicraftsman.  - Thus, not
only were they an élite corps, the most valuable portion of the
nation, the best timber of the forest, but again, the wood of each
branch belonged to that trunk; it grew there, and was the product of
its own vegetation; it sprung out of the trunk wholly through the
unceasing and spontaneous effort of the native sap, through time-
honored and recent labor, and, on this account, it merited respect.  -
Through a double onslaught, at once against each human branch and
against the entire French forest, the Jacobin wood-choppers seek to
clear the ground.  Their theory results in this precept, that not one
of the noble trees of this forest, not one valuable trunk from the
finest oak to the smallest sapling, should be left standing.

VII.   Principle of socialist Equality.

All superiorities of rank are illegitimate.  - Bearing of this
principle.  - Incivique benefits and enjoyments.  - How revolutionary
laws reach the lower class.  - Whole populations affected in a mass.
- proportion of the lowly in the proscription lists.  How the
revolutionary laws specially affect those who are prominent among the
people.

Not that the ravages which they make stop there! The principle
extended far beyond that.  The fundamental rule, according to Jacobin
maxims, is that every public or private advantage which any citizen
enjoys and which is not enjoyed by another citizen, is illegitimate.
- On Ventôse 19, year II., Henriot, general in command, having
surrounded the Palais Royal and made a sweep of "suspects," renders an
account of his expedition as follows:[87] "One hundred and thirty
muscadins have been arrested.  .  .  .  These gentlemen are
transferred to the Petits-Pêres.  Being well-fed and plump, they
cannot be sans-culottes." Henriot was right, for, to live well is
incivique.  Whoever lays in stores of provisions is criminal, even if
he has gone a good ways for them, even if he has not overpaid the
butcher of his quarter, even if he has not diminished by an ounce of
meat the ration of his neighbor; when he is found out, he is punished
and his hoard confiscated.  "A citizen[88] had a little pig brought to
him from a place six leagues from Paris, and killed it at once.  Three
hours afterwards, the pig was seized by commissioners and distributed
among the people, without the owner getting a bit of it;" moreover,
the said owner "was imprisoned." - He is a monopolist! To Jacobin
people, to empty stomachs, there is no greater crime; this misdeed, to
their imaginations, explains the arrest of Hébert, their favorite: "It
is said at the Halle (the covered Paris market)[89] that he has
monopolized a brother of the order of Saint-Antoine[90] as well as a
pot of twenty-five pounds of Brittany butter," which is enough; they
immediately and "unanimously consign Père Duchesne to the guillotine."
(Note that the Père Duchesne, founded by Hébert, was the most radical
and revolutionary journal.  (SR.) - Of all privileges, accordingly,
that of having a supply of food is the most offensive; "it is now
necessary for one who has two dishes to give one of them to him who
has none;"[91] every man who manages to eat more than another is a
robber; for, in the first place, he robs the community, the sole
legitimate owner of aliments, and next, he robs, and personally, all
who have less to eat than he has.

The same rule applies to other things of which the possession is
either agreeable or useful: in an equalizing social system, that now
established, every article of food possessed by one individual to the
exclusion of others, is a dish abstracted from the common table and
held by him to another's detriment.  On the strength of this, the
theorists who govern agree with the reigning ragamuffins.  Whoever has
two good coats is an aristocrat, for there are many who have only one
poor one.[92] Whoever has good shoes is an aristocrat, for many wear
wooden ones, and others go barefoot.  Whoever owns and rents lodgings
is an aristocrat, for others, his tenants, instead of receiving money,
pay it out.  The tenant who furnishes his own rooms is an aristocrat,
for many lodge in boarding-houses and others sleep in the open air.
Whoever possesses capital is an aristocrat, even the smallest amount
in money or in kind, a field, a roof over his head, half-a-dozen
silver spoons given to him by his parents on his wedding-day, an old
woollen stocking into which twenty or thirty crowns have been dropped
one by one, all one's savings, whatever has been laid by or
economized, a petty assortment of eatables or merchandise, one's crop
for the year and stock of groceries, especially if, disliking to give
them up and letting his dissatisfaction be seen, he, through
revolutionary taxation and requisitions, through the maximum and the
confiscation of the precious metals, is constrained to surrender his
small savings gratis, or at half their value.  - Fundamentally, it is
only those who have nothing of their own that are held to be patriots,
those who live from day to day,[93] "the wretched," the poor,
vagabonds, and the famished; the humblest laborer, the least
instructed, the most ill at his ease, is treated as criminal, as an
enemy, as soon as he is suspected of having some resources; in vain
does he show his scarified or callous hands; he escapes neither
spoliation, the prison, nor the guillotine.  At Troyes, a poor shop-
girl who had set up a small business on borrowed money, but who is
ruined by a bankruptcy and completely so by the maximum, infirm, and
consuming piecemeal the rest of her stock, is taxed five hundred
livres.[94] In the villages of Alsace, an order is issued to arrest
the five, six or seven richest persons in the commune, even if there
are no rich; consequently, they seize the least poor, simply because
they are so; for instance, at Heiligenberg, six "farmers" one of whom
is a day-laborer, "or journey-man," "suspect," says the register of
the jail, "because he is comfortably off."[95] On this account nowhere
are there so many "suspects" as among the people; the shop, the farm
and the work-room harbor more aristocrats than the rectory and the
chateau.  In effect, according to the Jacobins,[96] "nearly all
farmers are aristocrats;" "the merchants are all essentially anti-
revolutionary,"[97] and especially all dealers in articles of prime
necessity, wine-merchants, bakers and butchers; the latter especially
are open "conspirators," enemies "of the interior," and " whose
aristocracy is insupportable." Such, already, among the lower class of
people, are the many delinquents who are punished.

But there are still more of them to punish, for, besides the crime of
not being destitute, of possessing some property, of withholding
articles necessary for existence, there is the crime of aristocracy,
necessarily so called, namely, repugnance to, lack of zeal, or even
indifference for the established régime, regret for the old one,
relationship or intercourse with a condemned or imprisoned émigré of
the upper class, services rendered to some outlaw, the resort to some
priest; now, numbers of poor farmers, mechanics, domestics and women
servants, have committed this crime;[98] and in many provinces and in
many of the large cities nearly the whole of the laboring population
commits it and persists in it; such is the case, according to Jacobin
reports, in Alsace, Franche-Comté, Provence, Vaucluse, Anjou, Poitou,
Vendée, Brittany, Picardie and Flanders, and in Marseilles, Bordeaux
and Lyons.  In Lyons alone, writes Collot d'Herbois, "there are sixty
thousand persons who never will become republicans.  They should be
dealt with, that is made redundant, and prudently distributed all over
the surface of the Republic."[99] - Finally, add to the persons of the
lower class, prosecuted on public grounds, those who are prosecuted on
private grounds.  Among peasants in the same village, workmen of the
same trade and shopkeepers in the same quarter, there is always envy,
enmities and spites; those who are Jacobins become local pashas and
are able to gratify local jealousies with impunity, something they
never fail to do.[100]

Hence, on the lists of the guillotined, the incarcerated and of
emigrés, the men and women of inferior condition are in much greater
number, far greater than their companions of the superior and middle
classes all put together.  Out of 12,000 condemned to death whose rank
and professions have been ascertained, 7,545[101] are peasants,
cultivators, ploughmen, workmen of various sorts, innkeepers, wine-
dealers, soldiers and sailors, domestics, women, young girls, servants
and seamstresses.  Out of 1,900 emigrés from Doubs, nearly 1,100
belong to the lower class.  Towards the month of April, 1794, all the
prisons in France overflow with farmers;[102] in the Paris prisons
alone, two months before Thermidor 9, there are 2 000 of them.[103]
Without mentioning the eleven western departments in which four or
five hundred square leagues of territory are devastated and twenty
towns and one thousand eight hundred villages destroyed,[104] where
the avowed purpose of the Jacobin policy is a systematic and total
destruction of the country, man and beast, buildings, crops, and even
trees, there are cantons and even provinces where the entire rural and
working population is arrested or put to flight.  In the Pyrenees, the
old Basque populations "torn from their natal soil, crowded into the
churches with no means of subsistence but that of charity," in the
middle of winter, so that sixteen hundred of those incarcerated die
"mostly of cold and hunger;"[105]  at Bédouin, a town of two thousand
souls, in which a tree of liberty is cut down by some unknown persons,
four hundred and thirty-three houses are demolished or burned, sixteen
persons guillotined and forty-seven shot, while the rest of the
inhabitants are driven out, reduced to living like vagabonds on the
mountain, or in holes which they dig in the ground;[106] in Alsace,
fifty thousand farmers who, in the winter of 1793, take refuge with
their wives and children on the other side of the Rhine.[107] In
short, the revolutionary operation is a complete prostration of people
of all classes, the trunks as well as the saplings being felled, and
often in such a way as to clear the ground entirely.

But in this ruthless felling, however, the notables of the people,
making all due allowances, suffer more than the ordinary people.  It
is obvious that the Jacobin wood-chopper persecutes, insistently and
selectively, the veterans of labor and savings, the large cultivators
who from father to son and for many generations have possessed the
same farm, the master-craftsmen whose shops are well stocked and who
have good customers, the respectable, well-patronized retailers, who
owe nothing; the village-syndics and trades-syndics, all those showing
more deeply and visibly than the rest of their class, the five or six
blazes which summon the ax.  They are better off, better provided with
desirable comforts and conveniences, which is of itself an offense
against equality.  Having accumulated a small hoard, a few pieces of
plate, sometimes a few crowns,[108] a store of linen and clothes, a
stock of provisions or goods, they do not willingly submit to being
plundered, which is the offense of egoism.  Being egoists, it is
presumed that they are hostile to the system of fraternity, at least
indifferent to it, as well as lukewarm towards the Republic, that is
to say, Moderates, which is the worst offense of all.[109] Being the
foremost of their class, they are haughty like the nobles or the
bourgeois and regard themselves as superior to a poor man, to a
vagabond, to a genuine sans-culotte, the fourth and most inexcusable
of all offenses.  Moreover, from the fact of their superior condition,
they have contracted familiarities and formed connections with the
proscribed class; the farmer, the intendant, the overseer is often
attached to his noble proprietor or patron;[110] many of the farmers,
shopkeepers and craftsmen belonging to old families are considered as
affiliated with the bourgeoisie or the clergy,[111] through a son or
brother who has risen a degree in trade, or by some industrial
pursuit, or who, having completed his studies, has become a curé or
lawyer, or else through some daughter, or well-married sister, or
through one who has become a nun: now, this relation, ally, friend or
comrade of a "suspect " is himself a "suspect," - the last anti-
revolutionary and decisive barrier.  Sober and well-behaved persons,
having prospered or maintained themselves under the ancient régime,
must naturally cherish respect for former institutions; they must
involuntarily retain a deep feeling of veneration for the King, and
especially for religion; they are devout Catholics, and therefore are
chagrined to see the churches shut up, worship prohibited and
ecclesiastics persecuted, and would again be glad to go to Mass, honor
Easter, and have an orthodox curé who could administer to them
available sacraments, a baptism, an absolution, a marriage-rite, a
genuine extreme unction.[112] - Under all these headings, they have
made personal enemies of the rascals who hold office; on all these
grounds, they are struck down; what was once meritorious with them is
now disgraceful.  Thus, the principal swath consists of the élite of
the people, selected from amongst the people itself; it is against the
"subordinate aristocracy," those most capable of doing and conducting
manual labor, the most creditable workmen, through their activity,
frugality and good habits, that the Revolution, in its rigor against
the inferior class, rages with the greatest fury.

VIII.  Rigor against the Upper Classes.

The rigor of the revolutionary laws increase according to the
elevation of the class.  - The Notables properly so called attacked
because of their being Notables.  - Orders of Taillefer, Milhaud, and
Lefiot.  - The public atonement of Montargis.

For the same reason, as far as the notables, properly so-called, are
concerned, it bears down still more heavily, not merely on the nobles
because of ancient privileges, not merely on ecclesiastics on the
score of being insubordinate Catholics, but on nobles, ecclesiastics
and bourgeois in their capacity of notables, that is to say, born and
bred above others, and respected by the masses on account of their
superior condition.  -  In the eyes of the genuine Jacobin, the
notables of the third class are no less criminal than the members of
the two superior classes.  "The bourgeois,[113] the merchants, the
large proprietors," writes a popular club in the South, "all have the
pretension of the old set (des ci-dévants)." And the club complains of
"the law not providing means for opening the eyes of the people with
respect to these new tyrants." It is horrible! The stand they take is
an offense against equality and they are proud of it! And what is
worse, this stand attracts public consideration! Consequently, "the
club requests that the revolutionary Tribunal be empowered to consign
this proud class to temporary confinement," and then "the people would
see the crime it had committed and recover from the sort of esteem in
which they had held it." - Incorrigible and contemptuous heretics
against the new creed, they are only too lucky to be treated somewhat
like infidel Jews in the middle-ages.  Accordingly, if they are
tolerated, it is on the condition that they let themselves be pillaged
at discretion, covered with opprobrium and subdued through fear.  - At
one time, with insulting irony, they are called upon to prove their
dubious civism by forced donations.  "Whereas,"[114] says
Representative Milhaud, "all the citizens and citoyennes of Narbonne
being in requisition for the discharge and transport of forage;
whereas, this morning, the Representative, in person, having inspected
the performance of this duty," and having observed on the canal "none
but sans-culottes and a few young citizens; whereas, not finding at
their posts any muscadin and no muscadine; whereas, the persons, whose
hands are no doubt too delicate, even temporarily, for the glorious
work of robust sans-culottes, have, on the other hand, greater
resources in their fortune, and, desiring to afford to the rich of
Narbonne the precious advantage of being equally useful to the
republic," hereby orders that "the richest citizens of Narbonne pay
within twenty-four hours" a patriotic donation of one hundred thousand
livres, one-half to be assigned to the military hospitals, and the
other half, on the designation thereof by a "Committee of Charity,
composed of three reliable revolutionary sans-culottes," to be
distributed among the poor of the Commune.  Should any "rich egoist
refuse to contribute his contingent he is to be immediately
transferred to the jail at Perpignan." - Not to labor with one's own
hands, to be disqualified for work demanding physical strength, is of
itself a democratic stain, and the man who is sullied by this draws
down on himself, not alone an augmentation of pecuniary taxation, but
frequently an augmentation of personal compulsory labor.  At
Villeneuve, Aveyron, and throughout the department of Cantal,[115]
Representative Taillefer and his delegate Deltheil, instruct the
Revolutionary Committees to "place under military requisition and
conscription all muscadins above the first class," that is to say, all
between twenty-five and forty years of age who are not reached by the
law.  "By muscadins is meant all citizens of that age not married, and
exercising no useful profession," in other words, those who live on
their income.  And, that none of the middle or upper class may escape,
the edict subjects to special rigor, supplementary taxes, and
arbitrary arrest, not alone property-holders and fund-holders, but
again all persons designated under the following heads, - aristocrats,
Feuillants, moderates, Girondists, federalists, muscadins, the
superstitious, fanatics the abettors of royalism, of superstition and
of federation, monopolists, jobbers, egoists, "suspects " of incivism,
and, generally, all who are indifferent to the Revolution, of which
local committees are to draw up the lists.

Occasionally, in a town, some steps taken collectively, either a vote
or petition,.  furnish a ready-made list;[116] it suffices to read
this to know who are notables, the most upright people of the place;
henceforth, under the pretext of political repression, the levellers
may give free play to their social hatred.  - At Montargis, nine days
after the attempt of June 20, 1792,[117] two hundred and twenty-eight
notables sign an address in testimony of their respectful sympathy for
the King; a year and nine months later, in consequence of a
retroactive stroke, all are hit, and, with the more satisfaction,
inasmuch as in their persons the most respected in the town fall
beneath the blow, all whom flight and banishment had left there
belonging to the noble, ecclesiastic, bourgeois or popular
aristocracy.  Already, "on the purification of the constituted
authorities of Montargis, the representative had withdrawn every
signer from places of public trust and kept them out of all offices."
But this is not sufficient; the punishment must be more exemplary.
Four of them, the ex-mayor, an ex-collector, a district administrator
and a notable are sent to the revolutionary Tribunal in Paris, to be
guillotined in deference to principles.  Thirty-two former officers -
chevaliers of St.  Louis, mousquetaires, nobles, priests, an ex-
procureur-royal, an ex-treasurer of France, a former administrator of
the department, and two ladies, one of them designated as "calling
herself a former marchioness" - are confined, until peace is secured,
in the jail at Montargis.  Other former municipal officers and
officers in the National Guard - men of the law, notaries and
advocates, physicians, surgeons, former collectors, police
commissioners, postmasters, merchants and manufacturers, men and
women, married or widows and widowers - are to make public apology and
be summoned to the Temple of Reason to undergo there the humiliation
of a public penance on the 20th of Ventôse at three o'clock in the
afternoon.  They all go, for the summons says, "whoever does not
present himself on the day and hour named will be arrested and
confined until peace is declared." On reaching the church, purified by
Jacobin adoration, "in the presence of the constituted authorities of
the popular club and of the citizens convoked in general assembly,"
they mount one by one into a tribune raised three steps above the
floor," in such a way as to be in full sight.  One by one the national
agent, or the mayor, reprimands them in the following language:

 "You have been base enough to sign a fawning address to Louis XVI.,
the most odious and the vilest of tyrants, an ogre of the human
species guilty of every sort of crime and debauchery.  You are hereby
censured by the people.  You are moreover warned that on committing
the first act of incivism, or manifesting any anti-revolutionary
conduct, the surveillance of the constituted authorities will be
extended to you in the most energetic manner; the tribunals will show
you less leniency and the guillotine will insure prompt and imposing
justice."

Each, called by name, receives in turn the threatened admonition, and,
descending from the tribune amidst hues and cries, all sign the
procès-verbal.   But shame and guilt are often absent, and some of
them do not seem to be sufficiently penitent.  Consequently, at the
close of the ceremony, the National Agent calls the attention of the
assembly to "the impudence manifested by certain aristocrats, so
degraded that even national justice fails to make them blush;" and the
Revolutionary Committee, "considering the indifference and derisive
conduct of four women and three men, just manifested in this assembly;
considering the necessity of punishing an inveterate aristocracy which
seems to make sport of corrective acts that bear only (sic) on morals,
in a most exemplary manner, decides that the seven delinquents "shall
be put under arrest, and confined in the jail of Sainte-Marie." The
three who have shown indifference, are to be confined three months;
the four who have shown derision, are to be confined until peace is
restored.  Besides this, the decree of the National Agent and the
minutes of the meeting are to be printed and six thousand impressions
struck off at the expense of the signers, "the richest and most
'suspect,' " - a former treasurer of France, a notary, a grocer, the
wife of the former commandant of the gendarmerie, a widow and another
woman, - all, says the agent, " of very solid wealth and aristocracy."
"Bravo!" shouts the assembly, at this witticism; applause is given and
it sings "the national hymn." It is nine o'clock in the evening.  This
public penitence lasts six hours and the Jacobins of Montargis retire,
proud of their work; having punished as a public affront, an old and
legal manifestation of respect for the public magistrate; having sent
either to the scaffold or to prison, and fined or disgraced the small
local élite; having degraded to the level of prostitutes and felons
under surveillance, reputable women and honorable men who are, by law,
most esteemed under a normal system of government and who, under the
revolutionary system are, by law, the least so.[118]


IX.   The Jacobin Citizen Robot.

Two characteristics of the upper class, wealth and education.  - Each
of these is criminal.  - Measures against rich and well-to-do people.
- Affected in a mass and by categories.  - Measures against cultivated
and polite people.  - Danger of culture and distinction.  -
Proscription of "honest folks."

Two advantages, fortune and education, each involving the other, cause
a man to be ranked in the upper class; hence, one or the other,
whether each by itself or both together, mark a man out for
spoliation, imprisonment and death.  - In vain may he have
demonstrated his Jacobinism, and Jacobinism of the ultra sort.
Hérault-Séchelles, who voted for murdering the King, who belongs to
the Committee of Public Safety, who, in the Upper-Rhine, has just
carried out the worst revolutionary ordinances,[119] but who has the
misfortune to be rich and a man of the world, is led to the scaffold,
and those devoted to the guillotine readily explain his condemnation:
he is no patriot, - how could he be, enjoying an income of two hundred
thousand livres, and, moreover, is he not a general-advocate?[120] One
of these offenses is sufficient.  - Alone and by itself, "opulence,"
writes Saint-Just, "is a disgrace," and, according to him, a man is
opulent "who supports fewer children than he has thousands of livres
income; in effect, among the persons confined as "rich and egoists" we
find, according to the very declaration of the Revolutionary
Committee, persons with incomes of only 4,000, 3,700, 1,500, and even
500 livres.[121] Moreover, a fortune or a competence, inspires its
possessor with anti-revolutionary sentiments; consequently, he is for
the moment an obstruction; "You are rich," says Cambon, making use of
a personification, "you cherish an opinion, which compels us to be on
the defensive; pay then, so as to indemnify us and be thankful for our
indulgence which, precautionary and until peace is declared, keeps you
under bolt and bar."[122] Rich, anti-revolutionary, and vicious,"
according to Robespierre,[123] "these three traits depend on each
other, and, therefore, the possession of the superfluous is an
infallible sign of aristocracy, a visible mark of incivism" and, as
Fouché says, "a stamp of reprobation." "The superfluous is an evident
and unwarrantable violation of the people's rights; every man who has
more than his wants call for, cannot use, and therefore he must only
abuse."[124]  Whoever does not make over to the masses the excess of
what is strictly necessary.  .  .  .  places himself in the rank of
'suspects.' Rich egoists, you are the cause of our misfortunes!"[125]
"You dared to smile contemptuously on the appellation of sans-
culottes;[126] you have enjoyed much more than your brethren alongside
of you dying with hunger; you are not fit to associate with them, and
since you have disdained to have them eat at your table, they cast you
out eternally from their bosom and condemn you, in turn, to wear the
shackles prepared for them by your indifference or your maneuvers." In
other words, whoever has a good roof over his head, or wears good
clothes, man or woman, idler or industrious, noble or commoner, is
available for the prison or the guillotine, or, at the very least, he
is a taxable and workable serf at pleasure; his capital and
accumulations, if not spontaneously and immediately handed over, form
a criminal basis and proof of conviction.  - The orders of arrest are
generally issued against him on account of his wealth; in order to
drain a town of these offenders one by one, all are penned together
according to their resources; at Strasbourg,[127]  193 persons are
taxed, each from 6,000 to 300,000 livres, in all 9 million livres,
payable within twenty-four hours, by the leading men of each
profession or trade, bankers, brokers, merchants, manufacturers,
professors, pastors, lawyers, physicians, surgeons, publishers,
printers, upholsterers, glass-dealers, rope-makers, master-masons,
coffee-house and tavern keepers.  And let there be no delay in
responding to these orders within the prescribed time! Otherwise the
delinquents will be placed in the stocks, on the scaffold, face to
face with the guillotine.  "One of the best citizens in the commune,
who had steadily manifested his attachment to the Revolution, being
unable to realize a sum of 250,000 livres in one day, was fastened in
the pillory."[128] Sometimes the orders affected an entire class, not
alone nobles or priests, but all the members of any bourgeois
profession or even of any handicraft.  At Strasbourg, a little later,
"considering that the thirst for gold has always controlled the
brewers of the commune," they are condemned to 250,000 livres fine, to
be paid in three days under penalty of being declared rebels, with the
confiscation of their possessions;" then, upon another similar
consideration, the bakers and flour dealers are taxed three hundred
thousand livres.[129] In addition to this, writes Representative
Milhaud, at Guyardin,[130] "We have ordered the arrest of all bankers,
stock-brokers and notaries.  .  .  .  All their wealth is confiscated;
we estimate the sums under seal at 2 or 3 millions in coin, and 15 or
16 in assignats." There is the same haul of the net at Paris.  By
order of Lhuillier, procureur of the department, "seals are placed in
the offices of all the bankers, stock-brokers, silversmiths, etc.,"
and they themselves are shut up in the Madelonettes; a few days after,
that they may pay their drafts, they are let out as a favor, but on
condition that they remain under arrest in their homes, at their own
expense, under guard of two good sans-culottes.[131]  In like manner,
at Nantes,[132] Lyons, Marseilles and Bordeaux, the prisons are filled
and the guillotine works according to the categories.  At one time
they are "all of the Grand Théatre," or the principal merchants, "to
the number of more than 200," are incarcerated at Bordeaux in one
night.[133] At another time, Paris provides a haul of farmer-generals
or parliamentarians.  Carts leave Toulouse conveying its
parliamentarians to Paris to undergo capital punishment.  At Aix,
writes an agent,[134]

"the guillotine is going to work on former lawyers a few hundred heads
legally taken off will do the greatest good."

And, as new crimes require new terms to designate them, they add to
"incivisme" and "moderantisme," the term "negociantisme," all of which
are easily stated and widespread crimes.

"The rich and the merchants," writes an observer,[135] "are here, as
elsewhere, born enemies of equality and lovers of hideous federalism,
the only aristocracy that remains to be crushed out."

Barras, with still greater precision, declares in the tribune that,
"commerce is usurious, monarchical and anti-revolutionary."[136]
Considered in itself, it may be defined as an appeal to bad instincts;
it seems a corrupting, incivique, anti-fraternal institution, many
Jacobins having proposed either to interdict it to private persons and
attribute it wholly to the State, or suppress it along with the arts
and manufactures which nourish it, in order that only a population of
agriculturists and soldiers may be left in France.[137]

The second advantage and the second crime of the notables is
superiority of education.  "In all respectable assemblages," writes a
Dutch traveler in 1795,[138] "you may be sure that one-half of those
present have been in prison.   Add the absent, the guillotined, the
exiled, emigrés, the deported, and note this, that, in the other
favored half, those who did not quaff the prison cup had had a
foretaste of it for, each expected daily to receive his warrant of
arrest; "the worst thing under Robespierre, as several old gentlemen
have told me, was that one never knew in the morning whether one would
sleep in one's own bed at night." There was not a well-bred man who
did not live in dread of this; examine the lists of "suspects," of the
arrested, of exiles, of those executed, in any town, district or
department,[139] and you will see immediately, through their quality
and occupations, first, that three-quarters of the cultivated are
inscribed on it, and next, that intellectual culture in itself is
suspect.  "They were equally criminal,"[140] write the Strasbourg
administrators, "whether rich or cultivated .  .  .  .  The (Jacobin)
municipality declared the University federalist; it proscribed public
instruction and, consequently, the professors, regents, and heads of
schools, with all instructors, public as well as private, even those
provided with certificates of civism, were arrested; .  .  .  .  every
Protestant minister and teacher in the Lower-Rhine department was
incarcerated, with a threat of being transferred to the citadel at
Besançon." - Fourcroy, in the Jacobin Club at Paris, excusing himself
for being a savant, for giving lectures on chemistry, for not devoting
his time to the rantings of the Convention and of the clubs, is
obliged to declare that he is poor, that he lives by his work, that he
supports "his father, a sans-culotte, and his sans-culotte sisters;"
although a good republican, he barely escapes, and the same with
others like him.   All educated men were persecuted," he states a
month after Thermidor 9;[141] "to have acquaintances, to be literary,
sufficed for arrest, as an aristocrat.  .  .  .  Robespierre .  .  .
with devilish ingenuity, abused, calumniated and overwhelmed with gall
and bitterness all who were devoted to serious studies, all who
professed extensive knowledge; .  .  .  he felt that cultivated men
would never bend the knee to him [142].  .  .  .  .  Instruction was
paralyzed; they wanted to burn the libraries .  .  .  .  .  Must I
tell you that at the very door of your assembly errors in orthography
are seen? Nobody learns how to read or write." - At Nantes, Carrier
boasts of having "dispersed the literary chambers," while in his
enumeration of the evil-minded he adds "to the rich and merchants,"
"all gens d'esprit."[143] Sometimes on the turnkey's register we read
that such an one was confined "for being clever and able to do
mischief," another for saying "good-day, gentlemen, to the municipal
councillors."[144]

Politeness has, like other signs of a good education, become a stigma;
good manners are considered, not only as a remnant of the ancient
régime, but as a revolt against the new institutions; now, as the
governing principle of these is, theoretically, abstract equality and,
practically, the ascendancy of the low class, one rebels against the
established order of things when one repudiates coarse companions,
familiar oaths, and the indecent expressions of the common workman and
the soldier.  In sum, Jacobinism, through its doctrines and deeds, its
dungeons and executioners, proclaims to the nation over which it holds
the rod:[145]

 "Be rude, that you may become republican, return to barbarism that
you may show the superiority of your genius; abandon the customs of
civilized people that you may adopt those of galley slaves; mar your
language with a view to improve it; use that of the populace under
penalty of death.  Spanish beggars treat each other in a dignified
way; they show respect for humanity although in tatters.  We, on the
contrary, order you to assume our rags, our patois, our terms of
intimacy.  Don the carmagnole and tremble; become rustics and dolts,
and prove your civism by the absence of all education."

This is true to the letter.

"Education,[146] " says another contemporary, "amiable qualities,
gentle ways, a mild physiognomy, bodily graces, a cultivated mind, all
natural endowments are henceforth the inevitable causes of
proscription."

One is self-condemned if one has not converted oneself into a sans-
culotte and proletarian, in accordance with affected modes, air,
language and dress.  Hence,

"through a hypocritical contest hitherto unknown men who were not
vicious deemed it necessary to appear so."

And worse still,

 "one was even afraid to be oneself; one changed one's name, one went
in disguise, wearing a vulgar and tasteless attire; everybody shrunk
from being what he was."

For, according to the Jacobin program, all Frenchmen must be
recast[147] in one uniform mold; they must be taken when small; all
must be subject to the same enforced education, that of a mechanic,
rustic and soldier's boy.  Be warned, ye adults, by the guillotine,
reform yourselves beforehand according to the prescribed pattern! No
more costly, elegant or delicate crystal or gold vases! All are
shattered or are still being shattered.  Henceforth, only common ware
is to be tolerated or ordered to be made, all alike in substance,
shape and color, manufactured by thousands at wholesale and in public
factories, for the common and plain uses of rural and military life;
all original and superior forms are to be rejected.

 "The masters of the day," writes Daunou,[148] "deliberately aimed
their sword thrusts at superior talent, at energetic characters; they
mowed down as well as they could in so short a time, the flower and
hope of the nation."

In this respect they were consistent; equality-socialism[149] allows
none but automatic citizens, mere tools in the hands of the State, all
alike, of a rudimentary fashion and easily managed, without personal
conscience, spontaneity, curiosity or integrity; whoever has
cultivated himself, whoever has thought for himself and exercised his
own will and judgment rises above the level and shakes off the yoke;
to obtain consideration, to be intelligent and honorable, to belong to
the élite, is to be anti-revolutionary.  In the popular club of Bourg-
en-Bresse,[150] Representative Javogues declared that,

 "the Republic could be established only on the corpse of the last of
the respectable men."

X.   The Governors and the Governed.

Prisoners in the rue de Sévres and the "Croix-Rouge" revolutionary
committee.  - The young Dauphin and Simon his preceptor.  - Judges,
and those under their jurisdiction.  - Trenchard and Coffinhal,
Lavoisier and André Chénier.

Here we have, on one side, the élite of France, almost every person of
rank, fortune, family, and merit, those eminent for intelligence,
culture, talent and virtue, all deprived of common rights, in exile,
in prison, under pikes, and on the scaffold.  On the other side, those
above common law, possessing every office and omnipotent in the
irresponsible dictatorship, in the despotic proconsulships, in the
sovereignty of justice, a horde of the outcasts of all classes, the
parvenus of fanaticism, charlatanism, imbecility and crime.  Often,
when these personalities meet, one sees the contrast between the
governed and the governors in such strong relief that one almost
regards it as calculated and arranged beforehand; the colors and brush
of the painter, rather than words, are necessary to represent it.  In
the western section of Paris, in the prisons of the rue de Sévres[151]
the prisoners consist of the most distinguished personages of the
Quartier Saint Germain, prelates, officers, grand-seigniors, and noble
ladies, - - Monseigneur de Clermont-Tonnerre, Monseigneur de Crussol
d'Amboise, Monseigneur de Hersaint, Monseigneur de Saint Simon, bishop
of Agde, the Comtesse de Narbonne-Pelet, the Duchesse de Choiseul, the
Princesse de Chimay, the Comtesse de Raymond-Narbonne and her
daughter, two years of age, in short, the flower of that refined
society which Europe admired and imitated and which, in its exquisite
perfection, equalled or surpassed all that Greece, Rome and Italy had
produced in brilliancy, polish and amiability.  Contrast with these
the arbiters of their lives and deaths, the potentates of the same
quarter who issue the warrants of arrest against them, who pen them in
to speculate on them, and who revel at their expense and before their
eyes: these consist of the members of the revolutionary committee of
the Croix-Rouge, the eighteen convicted rogues and debauchees
previously described,[152] ex-cab-drivers, porters, cobblers, street-
messengers, stevedores, bankrupts, counterfeiters, former or future
jail-birds, all clients of the police or alms-house riff-raff.  - At
the other end of Paris, in the east, in the tower of the Temple,
separated from his sister and torn from his mother, still lives the
little Dauphin: no one in France merits more pity or respect than him.
For, if France exists, it is owing to the thirty-five military chiefs
and crowned kings of which he is the last direct scion; without their
thousand years of hereditary rule and preserving policy the intruders
into the Tuileries who have just profaned their tombs at St.  Denis
and thrown their bones into a common ditch,[153] would not be
Frenchmen.  At this moment, were suffrages free, the immense majority
of the people, nineteen Frenchmen out of twenty, would recognize this
innocent and precious child for their King, the heir of the people of
which their nation and country is formed, a child of eight years, of
rare precociousness, as intelligent as he is good, and of a gentle and
winning expression.  Look at the other figure alongside of him, his
fist raised and with insults on his lips, with a hang-dog face,
bloated with brandy, titular governor, official preceptor, and
absolute master of this child, the cobbler Simon, malignant, foul-
mouthed, mean in every way, forcing him to become intoxicated,
starving him, preventing him from sleeping, thrashing him, and who,
obeying orders, instinctively visits on him all his brutality and
corruption that he may pervert, degrade and deprave him.[154] - In the
Palais de Justice, midway between the tower of the Temple and the
prison in the rue de Sèvres, an almost similar contrast, transposing
the merits and demerits, daily brings together in opposition the
innocent with the vile.  There are days when the contrast, still more
striking, seats criminals on the judges' bench and judges on the bench
of criminals.  On the first and second of Floréal, the old
representatives and trustees of liberty under the monarchy, twenty-
five magistrates of the Paris and Toulouse parliaments, many of them
being eminent intellects of the highest culture and noblest character,
embracing the greatest historical names of the French magistracy, -
Etienne Pasquier, Lefèvre d'Ormesson, Molé de Champlatreux, De
Lamoignon, de Malesherbes, - are sent to the guillotine[155] by the
judges and juries familiar to us, assassins or brutes who do not take
the trouble, or who have not the capacity, to give proper color to
their sentences.  M. de Malesherbes exclaims, after reading his
indictment, " If that were only common-sense!" - In effect those who
pronounce judgment are, by their own admission, "substantial jurymen,
good sans-culottes, natural people." And such a nature! One of these,
Trenchard, an Auvergnat carpenter, portrays himself accurately in the
following note addressed to his wife before the trial comes on:

"If you are not alone, and the companion can work, you may come, my
dear, and see the twenty-four gentlemen condemned, all of them former
presidents or councillors in the parliaments of Toulouse and Paris.  I
recommend you to bring something along with you (to eat), it will be
three hours before we finish.  I embrace you, my dear friend and
wife."[156]

In the same court, Lavoisier, the founder and organizer of chemistry,
the great discoverer, and condemned to death, asks for a reprieve of
his sentence for a fortnight to complete an experiment, and the
president, Coffinhal, another Auvergnat, replies,

 "The Republic has no need of savants."[157]

 And it has no need of poets.  The first poet of the epoch, André
Chénier, the delicate and superior artist who reopens antique sources
of inspiration and starts the modern current, is guillotined; we
possess the original manuscript indictment of his examination, a
veritable master-piece of gibberish and barbarism, of which a full
copy is necessary to convey an idea of its "turpitudes of sense and
orthography."[158] The reader may there see, if he pleases, a man of
genius delivered up to brutes, coarse, angry, despotic animals, who
listen to nothing, who comprehend nothing, who do not even understand
terms in common use, who stumble through their queries, and who, to
ape intelligence, draggle their pens along in supreme stupidity.

The overthrow is complete.  France, subject to the Revolutionary
Government, resembles a human being forced to walk with his head down
and to think with his feet.
_____________________________________________________________________

Notes:


[1] Cf.  "The Revolution," book I., ch.  3, and book III., chs. 9 and
10.

[2] Grégoire, " Memoires," II., 172.  "About eighteen thousand
ecclesiastics are enumerated among the émigrés of the first epoch.
About eighteen thousand more took themselves off, or were sent off,
after the 2nd of September."

[3] Ibid., 26.  "The chief of the émigré bureau in the police
department (May 9, 1805) enumerates about two hundred thousand persons
reached, or affected, by the laws concerning emigration." - Lally-
Tolendal, "Défense des Emigrés," (2nd part, p.  62 and passim).
Several thousand persons inscribed as émigrés did not leave France.
The local administration recorded them on its lists either because
they lived in another department, and could not obtain the numerous
certificates exacted by the law in proof of residence, or because
those who made up the lists treated these certificates with contempt.
It was found convenient to manufacture an émigré in order to
confiscate his possessions legally, and even to guillotine him, not
less legally, as a returned émigré.  - Message of the Directory to the
"Five Hundred," Ventôse 3, year V.: "According to a rough estimate,
obtained at the Ministry of Finances, the number enrolled on the
general list of émigres amounts to over one hundred and twenty
thousand; and, again, the lists from some of the departments have not
come in." - Lafayette, "Mémoires," vol.  II., 181.  (Letters to M. de
Maubourg, Oct.  17, 1799 (noté) Oct.  19, 1800.) According to the
report of the Minister of Police, the list of émigrés, in nine vols.,
still embraced one hundred and forty-five thousand persons,
notwithstanding that thirteen thousand were struck off by the
Directory, and twelve hundred by the consular government.

[4] Cf.  Mémoires of Louvet, Dulaure and Vaublanc.  - Mallet-Dupan,
"Mémoires," II., 7.  "Several, to whom I have spoken, literally made
the tour of France in various disguises, without having been able to
find an outlet; it was only after a series of romantic adventures that
they finally succeeded in gaining the Swiss frontier, the only one at
all accessible." - Sauzay, V., 210, 220, 226, 276.  (Emigration of
fifty-four inhabitants of Charquemont, setting out for Hungary.)

[5] Ibid., vols.  IV., V., VI., VII.  (On the banished priests
remaining and still continuing their ministrations, and on those who
returned to resume them.) - To obtain an idea of the situation of the
emigrés and their relations and friends, it is necessary to read the
law of Sep.15, 1794 (Brumaire 25, year III.), which renews and
generalizes previous laws; children of fourteen years and ten years
are affected by it.  It was with the greatest difficulty, even if one
did not leave France, that a person could prove that he had not
emigrated.

[6] Pandour, an 18th century Croatian foot-soldier in the Austrian
service: a robber.  (SR)

[7] Moniteur, XVIII., 215.  (Letter of Brigadier-general Vandamme to
the convention, Ferney, Brumaire I, year II.) The reading of this
letter calls forth "reiterated applause."

[8] Sauzay, V., 196.  (The total is five thousand two hundred.  Some
hundreds of names might be added, inasmuch as many of the village
lists are wanting.)

[9] Buchez et Roux, XXXIV., 434.  (Trial of Fouquier-Tinville,
deposition of Therriet-Grandpré, one of the heads of the commission on
civil Police and Judicial Administration, 51st witness.)

[10] Report by Saladin, March 4, 1795.

[11] Wallon, "La Terreur," II., 202.

[12] Duchatelier, "Brest Pendant la Terreur," p.  105.  - Paris,
"Histoire de Joseph Lebon," II., 370.  - "Tableau des Prisons de
Toulouse," by Pescayre, p.  409.  - " Recueil de Pièces Authentiques
sur la Révolution à Strasbourg," I., 65.  (List of arrests after
Prairial 7, year II.) When the following arrests were made there were
already over three thousand persons confined in Strasbourg." - Alfred
Lallier, "Les Noyades de Nantes," p.90.  - Berryat Saint-Prix, p.436.
(Letter of Maignet to Couthon, Avignon, Floreal 4, year II.)

[13] Baulieu, "Essais," V., 283.  At the end of December, 1793,
Camille Desmoulins wrote: "Open the prison doors to those two hundred
thousand citizens whom you call 'suspects'!" - The number of prisoners
largely increased during the seven following months.  ("Le Vieux
Cordelier," No.  IV., Frimaire 30, year II.) - Beaulieu does not state
precisely what the committee of General Security meant by the word
déténu.  Does it merely relate to those incarcerated? Or must all who
were confined at their own houses be included? - We are able to verify
his statement and determine the number, at least approximatively, by
taking one department in which the rigor of the revolutionary system
was average and where the lists handed in were complete.  According to
the census of 1791, Doubs contained two hundred and twenty-one
thousand inhabitants; France had a population of 26 millions, and we
have just seen the number of each category that were under
confinement; the proportion for France gives 258 000 persons
incarcerated, and 175 000 confined to their houses, and 175 000
persons besides these on the limits in their communes, or ajournées,
that is to say, 608 000 persons deprived of their liberty.  The first
two categories form a total of 433 000 persons, sufficiently near
Beaulieu's figures.

[14] Paris, "Histoire de Joseph Lebon," II., 371, 372, 375, 377, 379,
380.  - "Les Angoisses de la Mort," by Poirier and Monjay of Dunkirk
(second edition, year III.).  "Their children and trusty agents still
remained in prison; they were treated no better than ourselves.  .  .
.  we saw children coming in from all quarters, infants of five years,
and, to withdraw them from paternal authority, they had sent to them
from time to time, commissioners who used immoral language with them."

[15] Mémoires sur les Prisons," (Barrière et Berville collection),
II., 354, and appendix F.  Ibid., II., 2262.  - The women were the
first to pass under rapiotage." (Prisons of Arras and that of Plessis,
at Paris.)

[16] Documents on Daunou," by Taillandier.  (Narrative by Daunou, who
was imprisoned in turn in La Force, in the Madelonettes, in the
English Benedictine establishment, in the Hotel des Fermes, and in
Port-Libre.) - On prison management cf., for the provinces, "Tableaux
des Prisons de Toulouse," by Pescayre; "Un Sejour en France," and "Les
Horreurs des Prisons d'Arras," for Arras and Amiens; Alexandrines des
Echerolles, "Une Famille noble sous la Terreur," for Lyons; the trial
of Carrier for Nantes; for Paris, "Histoire des Prisons" by Nougaret,
4 vols., and the "Mémoires sur les Prisons," 2 vols.

[17] Testimony of Representative Blanqui, imprisoned at La Force, and
of Representative Beaulieu, imprisoned in the Luxembourg and at the
Madelonettes.  - Beaulieu, "Essais," V., 290: "The conciergerie was
still full of wretches held for robbery and assassination, poverty-
stricken and repulsive.  - It was with these that counts, marquises,
voluptuous financiers, elegant dandies, and more than one wretched
philosopher, were shut up, pell-mell, in the foulest cells, waiting
until the guillotine could make room in the chambers filled with camp-
bedsteads.  They were generally put with those on the straw, on
entering, where they sometimes remained a fortnight...  It was
necessary to drink brandy with these persons; in the evening, after
having dropped their excrement near their straw, they went to sleep in
their filth.  .  .  .  I passed those three nights half-sitting, half-
stretched out on a bench, one leg on the ground and leaning against
the wall." - Wallon, "La Terreur," II., 87.  (Report of Grandpré on
the Conciergerie, March 17, 1793.  "Twenty-six men collected into one
room, sleeping on twenty-one mattresses, breathing the foulest air and
covered with half-rotten rags." In another room forty-five men and ten
straw-beds; in a third, thirty-nine poor creatures dying in nine
bunks; in three other rooms, eighty miserable creatures on sixteen
mattresses filled with vermin, and, as to the women, fifty-four having
nine mattresses and standing up alternately.  - The worst prisons in
Paris were the Conciergerie, La Force, Le Plessis and Bicêtre.  -
"Tableau des Prisons de Toulouse," p.  316.  "Dying with hunger, we
contended with the dogs for the bones intended for them, and we
pounded them up to make soup with."

[18] "Recueil de Pièces, etc.," i., p.3.  (Letter of Frédéric Burger,
Prairial 2, year II.)

[19] Alfred Lallier, "Les Noyades de Nantes," p.  90.  - Campardon,
"Histoire de Tribunal Révolutionnaire de Paris," (trial of Carrier),
II., 55.  (Deposition of the health-officer, Thomas.) " I saw perish
in the revolutionary hospital (at Nantes) seventy-five prisoners in
two days.  None but rotten mattresses were found there, on each of
which the epidemic had consumed more than fifty persons.  At the
Entrepot, I found a number of corpses scattered about here and there.
I saw children, still breathing, drowned in tubs full of human
excrement."

[20] Narrative of the sufferings of unsworn priests, deported in 1794,
in the roadstead of Aix, passim.

[21] "Histoire des Prisons," I., 10.  "Go and visit," says a
contemporary, (at the Conciergerie), the dungeons called 'the great
Csar,' 'Bombie,' 'St.  Vincent.' ' Bel Air,' etc., and say whether
death is not preferable to such an abode." Some persons, indeed, the
sooner to end the matter, wrote to the public prosecutor, accusing
themselves, demanding a king and priests, and are at once guillotined,
as they hoped to be.  - Cf.  the narrative of "La Translation des 132
à Nantois Paris," and Riouffe, "Mémoires," on the sufferings of
prisoners on their way to their last prison.

[22] Berryat Saint-Prix, p.  IX., passim.

[23] Campardon, II., 224.

[24] Berryat Saint-Prix, 445.  - Paris, "Histoire de Joseph Lebon,"
II., 352.  - Alfred Lallier, p.  90.  - Buchez et Roux, XXXII., 394.

[25] Berryat Saint-Prix, pp.23, 24.

[26] Berryat Saint-Prix, p.458.  "At Orange, Madame de Latour-Vidan,
aged eighty and idiotic for many years, was executed with her son.  It
is stated that, on being led to the scaffold, she thought she was
entering a carriage to pay visits and so told her son." - Ibid., 471.
After Thermidor, the judges of the Orange commission having been put
on trial, the jury declared that " they refused to hear testimony for
the defense and did not allow the accused even informal lawyers to
defend them."

[27] Camille Boursier," La Terreur en Anjou," p.228.  (Deposition of
Widow Edin.) "La Persac, a nun ill and infirm, was ready to take the
oath.  Nicolas, Vacheron's agent, assisted by several other persons,
dragged her out of bed and put her on a cart; from ninety to ninety-
four others were shot along with her."

[28] Berryat Saint-Prix, p.  161.  The following are samples of these
warrants: "S.  (shot), Germinal 13, Widow Menard, seventy-two years
old, an old aristocrat, liking nobody, habitually living by herself."
- Warrant of the Marseilles committee, Germinal 28, year II.,
condemning one Cousinéri for having continually strayed off as if to
escape popular vengeance, to which he was liable on account of his
conduct and for having detested the Revolution." - Camille Boursier,
p.72, Floréal 15, year II., execution of "Gerard, guilty of having
scorned to assist at the planting of a Liberty-pole, in the commune of
Vouille, Sep., 1792, and inducing several municipal officers to join
him in his insolent and liberticide contempt."

[29] Wallon, "Histoire du Tribunal Révolutionnaire de Paris, V., 145.

[30] Ibid., v., 109.  (Deposition of Madame de Maillé.) - V., 189.
(Deposition of Lhullier.) - Cf.  Campardon, in the same affairs.

[31] Campardon, II., 189, 190, 193, 197.  (Depositions of Beaulieu,
Duclos, Tirard, Ducray, etc.)

[32] Berryat Saint-Prix, 395.  (Letter of Representative Moyse Bayle,)
- Ibid., 216.  (Words of Representative Lecarpentier at Saint-Malo.)
"Why such delays? Of what use are these eternal examinations? What
need is there of going so deep into this matter? The name, profession
and the upshot, and the trial is over." - He publicly stated to the
informers: You don't know what facts you require to denounce the
Moderates? Well, a gesture, one single gesture, suffices."

[33] Letter of Payan to Roman Formosa, judge at Orange: "In the
commissions charged with punishing the conspirators, no formalities
should exist; the conscience of the judge is there as a substitute for
these.  .  .  The commissions must serve as political courts; they
must remember that all the men who have not been on the side of the
Revolution are against it, since they have done nothing for the
country.  .  .  I say to all judges, in the name of the country, do
not risk saving a guilty man." - Robespierre made the same declaration
in the Jacobin Club.  Frimaire 19, year II.: "We judge, in politics,
with the suspicions of an enlightened patriotism."

[34] "Mémoires de Fréron" and on Fréron, (collection Barrière et
Berville,) p.364.  Letter of Fréron, Toulon, Nivôse 16.  "More than
eight hundred Toulonese have already been shot."

[35] Lallier, p.90.  (The eleven distinct drownings ascertained by M.
Lallier extend up to Pluviôse 12, year II.)

[36] Moniteur, XXII., 227.  (Official documents read in the
Convention, Ventôse 21, year III.) These documents authenticate an
ulterior drowning.  Ventôse 9, year II., by order of Lefévre, adjutant
general, forty-one persons were drowned, among whom were two men
seventy-eight years of age and blind, twelve women, twelve young
girls, fifteen children, of which ten were between six and ten years
old, and five at the breast.  The drowning took place in the Bourgneuf
bay.-Carrier says in the Convention, (Moniteur, XXII., p.578), in
relation to the drowning of pregnant women: "At Laval, Angers, Saumur,
Chaban-Gontier, everywhere the same things took place as at Nantes."

[37] Camille Boursier, p.159.

[38] Ibid., 203.  Representative Francastel announces "the firm
determination to purge, to bleed freely this Vendean question." This
same Francastel wrote to General Grignon: "Make those brigands
tremble! Give them no quarter! The prisons in Vendée are overflowing
with prisoners! .  .  .  The conversion of this country into a desert
must be completed.  Show no weakness and no mercy.  .  .  These are
the views of the Convention.  .  .  .  I swear that Vendée shall be
depopulated."

[39] Granier de Cassagnac, "His.  du Directoire," II., 241.  - (Letter
of General Hoche to the Minister of the Interior, Feb.  2, 1796.)
"Only one out of five remains of the population of 1789."

[40] Campardon, II., 247, 249, 251, 261, 321.  (Examination of
Fouquier-Tinville, Cambon's words.)

[41] Article by Guffroy, in his journal Le Rougiff: "Down with the
nobles, and so much the worse for the good ones, if there are any! Let
the guillotine stand permanently throughout the Republic.  Five
millions of inhabitants are enough for France!" - Berryat Saint-Prix,
445.  (Letter of Fauvety, Orange, Prairial 14, year II.) "We have but
two confined in our arrondissement.  What a trifle!" - Ibid., 447.
(Letter of the Orange Committee to the Committee of Public Safety,
Messidor 3.) As soon as the Committee gets fully agoing it is to try
all the priests, rich merchants and ex-nobles." - (Letter of Juge,
Messidor 2.) "Judging by appearances more than three thousand heads
will fall in the department." - Ibid., 311.  At Bordeaux, a huge
scaffold is put up, authorized by the Military Committee, with seven
doors, two of which are large and like barn-doors, called a four-
bladed guillotine, so as to work faster and do more.  The warrant and
orders for its construction bear date Thermidor 3 and 8, year II.  -
Berryat Saint-Prix, 285.  Letter of Representative Blutel, on mission
at Rochefort, after Thermidor: "A few men, sunk in debauchery and
crime, dared proscribe (here) virtues, patriotism, because it was not
associated with their sanguinary excitement: the tree of Liberty, they
said, required for its roots ten feet of human gore."

[42] "Recueil de Pièces Authentiques, concernant le Revolution à
Strasbourg," I., 174, 178.  Examples of revolutionary taxes.  - Orders
of Representatives Milhaud, Ruamps, Guyadin, approving of the
following contributions, Brumaire 20, year II.

On 3 individuals of Stutzheim.....................150,000 livres.
 " 3    "           Offenheim.....  ...............30,000  "
 "21   "            Molsheim .....................367,000  "
 " 17   "           Oberenheim....................402,000  "
 " 84   "           Rosheim.......................503,000  "
 " 10   "           Mutzig........................114,000  "

  Another order by Daum and Tisseraud, members of the committee who
temporarily replace the district administrators: "Whereas, it is owing
to the county aristocrats that the Republic supports the war," they
approve of the following taxes:

On the aristocrats of Geispolzheim,              400,000 livres.
         ditto     of Oberschffolsheim          200,000 "
         ditto     of  Düttlenheim               150,000 "
         ditto     of  Duppigheim                100,000 "
         ditto     of  Achenheim                 100,000 "

List of contributions raised in the rural communes of the district of
Strasbourg, according to an assessment made by Stamm, procureur pro
tem.  of the district, amounting to three millions one hundred and
ninety-six thousand one hundred livres.

[43] "Recueil des Pieces Authentiques," etc., I., 23.  By order of the
representatives under date of Brumaire 25, year II.  "The municipality
of Strasbourg stripped the whole commune of shoes in twenty-four
hours, sending for them from house to house." - Ibid..  p.32.  Orders
of Representatives Lemaire and Baudot, Frimaire I, year II., declaring
that kitchen-utensils, boilers, sauce-pans, stew-pans, kettles and
other copper and lead vessels, as well as copper and lead not worked-
up, found at Strasbourg and in the departments, be levied on." -
Archives Nationales, AF., I., 92.  (Orders of Taillefer, Brumaire 3,
year II.  Villefranche 1'Avergnon.) Formation of a Committee of ten
persons directed to make domiciliary visits, and authorized to take
possession of all the iron, lead, steel and copper found in the houses
of "suspects," all of which kitchen utensils, are to be turned into
cannon.  - Mallet-Dupan, "Mémoires," I., 15.

[44] Moniteur, XXV., 188.  (Speech by Blutels, July 9, 1795.)

[45] "Recueil du Pièces Authentiques," etc., I., 24.  - Grégoire,
reports on Vandalism, Fructidor 14, year II., and Brumaire 14, year
III.  (Moniteur, XXII., 86 and 751.) - Ibid., Letter of December 24,
1796: "Not millions, but billions have been destroyed." - Ibid.,,
"Mémoires," I., 334: "It is incalculable, the loss of religious,
scientific and literary objects.  The district administrations of
Blanc (Indre) notified me that to ensure the preservation of a
library, they had the books put in casks." - Four hundred thousand
francs were expended in smashing statues of the Fathers of the church,
forming a circle around the dome of the Invalides.  - A great many
objects became worthless through a cessation of their use: for
example, the cathedral of Meaux was put up at auction and found no
purchaser at six hundred francs.  The materials were valued at forty-
five thousand francs, but labor (for taking it down) was too high.
(Narrative by an inhabitant of Meaux.)

[46] Les Origines du Système Financier Actuel," by Eugene Sturm, p.53,
79.

[47] Meissner, "Voyage à Paris," (end of 1795), p.  65.  "The class of
those who may have really gained by the Revolution....  is composed of
brokers, army contractors, and their subordinates, a few government
agents and fermiers, enriching themselves by their new acquisitions,
and who are cool and shrewd enough to hide their grain, bury their
gold and steadily refuse assignats." - Ibid., 68, 70.  " On the road,
he asks to whom a fine chateau belongs, and they tell him with a
significant look, 'to a former scruffy wretch.' - 'Oh, monsieur,' said
the landlady at Vesoul, 'for every one that the Revolution has made
rich, you may be sure that it has made a thousand poor.'"

[48] The following descriptions and appreciations are the fruit of
extensive investigation, scarcely one tenth of the facts and texts
that have been of service being cited.  I must refer the reader,
accordingly, to the series of printed and written documents of which I
have made mention in this and the three preceding volumes.

[49] "The Ancient Regime," book II., ch 2, § IV.

[50] Ibid., book IV., chs.  I., II., III.

[51] Lacretelle, "Histoire de France au 18eme Siecle," V., 2.  - -"
The Ancient Regime," pp.  163, 300.

[52] Morellet, "Mémoires," I., 166.  (Letter by Rderer to Beccaria's
daughter, May 20, 1797).

[53] Beccaria (Cesare Bonesana, marquis de) (Milan 1738 - id.  1794).
Italian jurist, whose "Traité des délits et des peines (1764)
contributed to the reforms and the softening of of European penal law.
(SR)

[54] Mallet-Dupan, "Mémoires," II., 493.  "While the Duke of Orleans
was undergoing his examination he read a newspaper." - Ibid., 497.
"Nobody died with more firmness, spirit and dignity than the Duke of
Orleans.  He again became a royal prince.  On being asked in the
revolutionary tribunal whether he had any defense to make, he replied,
'Rather die to-day than to-morrow: deliberate about it.'" His request
was granted.  - The Duc de Biron refused to escape, considering that,
in such a dilemma, it was not worth while.  "He passed his time in
bed, drinking Bordeaux wine.  .  .  .  Before the tribunal, they asked
his name and he replied, 'Cabbage, turnip, Biron, as you like, one is
as good as the other.' 'How!' exclaimed the judges, 'you are
insolent!' 'And you - you are windbags! I Come to the point;
Guillotine, that is all you have to say, while I have nothing to
say.'" Meanwhile they proceeded to interrogate him on his pretended
treachery in Vendée, etc.  "'You do not know what you are talking
about! You ignoramuses know nothing about war! Stop your questions.  I
reported at the time to the Committee of Public Safety, which approved
of my conduct.  Now, it has changed and ordered you to take my life.
Obey, and lose no more time.' Biron asked pardon of God and the King.
Never did he appear better than on the (executioner's) cart."

[55] Morellet, II., 31.-"Mémoires de la Duchesse de Tourzel," "de
Mlle.  des Écherolles," etc.-Beugnot, "Mémoires, I., 200-203.  "The
wittiest remarks, the most delicate allusions, the most brilliant
repartees were exchanged on each side of the grating.  The
conversation was general, without any subject being dwelt on.  There,
misfortune was treated as if it were a bad child to be laughed at,
and, in fact, they did openly make sport of Marat's divinity,
Robespierre's sacerdoce and the magistracy of Fouquier.  They seemed
to say to all these bloody menials: 'You may slaughter us when you
please, but you cannot hinder us in being aimable'"-Archives
Nationales, F.7, 31167.  (Report by the watchman, Charmont, Nivôse 29,
year II.) "The people attending the executions are very much surprised
at the firmness and courage they show (sic) on mounting the scaffold.
They say that it looks (sic) like going to a wedding.  People cannot
get used to it, some declaring that it is supernatural."

[56] Sauzay, I..  introduction.  - De Tocqueville, "L'Ancien Regime et
la Revolution," 166.  "I have patiently read most of the reports and
debates of the provincial États,' and especially those of Languedoc,
where the clergy took much greater part than elsewhere in
administrative details, as well as the procès-verbaux of the
provincial assemblies between 1779 and 1787, and, entering on the
study with the ideas of my time, I was surprised to find bishops and
abbés, among whom were several as eminent for their piety as their
learning, drawing up reports on roads and canals, treating such
matters with perfect knowledge of the facts, discussing with the
greatest ability and intelligence the best means for increasing
agricultural products, for ensuring the well-being of the people and
the property of industrial enterprises, oftentimes much better than
the laymen who were interested with them in the same affairs."

[57] "The Ancient Regime," p.300.  - " The Revolution," vol.  I., p.
116.  ??Buchez et Roux, I., 481.  The list of notables convoked by the
King in 1787 gives an approximate idea of this social staff.  Besides
the leading princes and seigniors we find, among one hundred and
thirty-four members, twelve marshals of France, eight Councillors of
State, five maîtres de requêtes, fourteen bishops and archbishops,
twenty presidents and seventeen procureurs géneraux des parlements, or
of royal councils, twenty-five mayors, prévôts des marchands,
capitouls, and equerries of large towns, the deputies of the "Etats"
of Burgundy, Artois, Brittany and Languedoc, three ministers and two
chief clerks.  - The capacities were all there, on hand, for bringing
about a great reform; but there was no firm, strong, controlling hand,
that of a Richelieu or Frederic II.

[58] See "The Revolution II" Ed. Lafont page 617. US ediction P.  69.
(SR.)

[59] "Mémoires de Gaudin," duc de Gaëte.

[60] Mallet-Dupan, "Mémoires," II., 25, 24.  "The War Committee is
composed of engineer and staff-officers, of which the principal are
Meussuer, Favart, St.  Fief, d'Arcon, LafitteClavé and a few others.
D'Arcon directed the raising of the siege of Dunkirk and that of
Maubenge.  .  .  .  These officers were selected with discernment;
they planned and carried out the operations; aided by immense
resources, in the shape of maps, plans and reconnaissances preserved
in the war department, they really operated according to the
experience and intelligence of the great generals under the monarchy."

[61] Miot de Melito, "Mémoires," I., 47.  - Andre Michel,
"Correspondance de MalletDupan avec la Cour de Vienne," I., 26.
(January 3, 1795.) "The Convention feels so strongly the need of
suitable aids to support the burden of its embarrassments as to now
seek for them among pronounced royalists.  For instance, it has just
offered the direction of the royal treasury to M. Dufresne, former
chief of the department under the reign of the late King, and retired
since 1790.  It is the same spirit and making a still more
extraordinary selection, which leads them to appoint M. Gerard de
Rayneval to the Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, chief-clerk of
correspondence since the ministry of the Duc de Choiseul until that of
the Comte de Montmorin inclusive.  He is a man of decided opinions and
an equally decided character; in 1790 I saw him abandon the department
through aversion to the maxims which the Revolution had forcibly
introduced into it.

[62] Marshal Marmont, "Mémoires." At nine years of age he rode on
horseback and hunted daily with his father.

[63] Among other manuscript documents, a letter of M. Symn de
Carneville, March II, 1781.  (On the families of Carneville and
Montmorin-Saint-Herem, in 1789.) The latter family remains in France;
two of its members are massacred, two executed, a fifth "escaped the
scaffold by forestalling the justice of the people;" the sixth,
enlisted in the revolutionary armies, received a shot at nineteen
years of age which made him blind.  The other family emigrated, and
its chiefs, the count and viscount Carneville commanded, one, a free
company in the Austrian service, and the other, a regiment of hussars
in Conde's army.  Twelve officers of these two corps were brothers-in-
law, nephews, first-cousins and cousins of the two commanders, the
first of whom entered the service at fifteen, and the second at
eleven.  - Cf.  "Mémoires du Prince de Ligne." At seven or eight years
of age I had already witnessed the din of battle, I had been in a
besieged town, and saw three sieges from a window.  A little older, I
was surrounded by soldiers; old retired officers belonging to various
services, and living in the neighborhood fed my passion.- Turenne said
"I slept on a gun-carriage at the age of ten.  My taste for war was so
great as to lead me to enlist with a captain of the 'Royal Vaissiaux,'
in garrison two leagues off.  If war had been declared I would have
gone off and let nobody know it.  I joined his company, determined not
to owe my fortune to any but valorous actions." - Cf.  also "Mémoires
du Maréchal de Saxe." A soldier at twelve, in the Saxon legion,
shouldering his musket, and marching with the rest, he completed each
stage on foot from Saxony to Flanders, and before he was thirteen took
part in the battle of Malplaquet.

[64] Alexandrine des Echerolles, "Un Famille Noble sous la Terreur,"
p.25.  - Cf.  "Correspondance de Madelle de Féring," by Honore
Bonhomme.  The two sisters, one sixteen and the other thirteen,
disguised as men, fought with their father in Dumouriez' army.  - See
the sentiment of young nobles in the works of Berquin and Marmontel.
(Les Rivaux d' Eux-meme.)

[65] " The Revolution," I., 158, 325.  Ibid., the affair of M. de
Bussy, 306; the affair of the eighty-two gentlemen of Caen, 316.  -
See in Rivarol ("Journal Politique Nationale") details of the
admirable conduct of the Body-guards at Versailles, Oct.  5 and 6,
1789.

[66] The noble families under the ancient regime may be characterized
as so many families of soldiers' children.

[67] "L'Ancien Régime et la Revolution," by M. de Tocqueville, p.169.
My judgment, likewise based on the study of texts, and especially
manuscript texts, coincides here as elsewhere with that of M. de
Tocqueville.  Biographies and local histories contain documents too
numerous to be cited.

[68] Sauzay, I., introduction, and Ludovic Sciout, " Histoire de la
Constitution Civile du Clergé," I., introduction.  (See in Sauzay,
biographical details and the grades of the principal ecclesiastical
dignitaries of the diocese Besançon.) The cathedral chapter, and that
of the Madeleine, could be entered only through nobility or promotion;
it was requisite for a graduate to have a noble for a father, or a
doctor of divinity, and himself be a doctor of divinity or in canon
law.  Analogous titles, although lower down, were requisite for
collegiate canons, and for chaplains or familiars.

[69] The Revolution," I., 233.  - Cf.  Emile Ollivier, "L'Eglise et
l'Etat au Concile du Vatican," I., 134, II., 511.

[70] Morellet, "Mémoires," I., 8, 31.  The Sorbonne, founded by Robert
Sorbon, confessor to St.  Louis, was an association resembling one of
the Oxford or Cambridge colleges, that is to say, a corporation
possessing a building, revenues, rules, regulations and boarders; its
object was to afford instruction in the theological sciences; its
titular members, numbering about a hundred, were mostly bishops,
vicars-general, canons, curés in Paris and in the principal towns.
Men of distinction were prepared in it at the expense of the Church.
- The examinations for the doctorate were the tentative, the mineure,
the Sorbonique and the majeure.  A talent for discussion and argument
was particularly developed.  - Cf.  Ernest Renan, "Souvenirs d'Enfance
et de Jeunesse," p.279, (on St.  Sulpice and the study of Theology).

[71] Cf.  the files of the clergy in the States-General, and the
reports of ecclesiastics in the provincial assemblies.

[72] "The Revolution," p.72.  (Ed.  Lafont I, p 223 etc.)

[73] In some dioceses, notably that of Besançon, the rural parishes
were served by distinguished men.  (Sauzay, I., 16.) "It was not
surprising to encounter a man of European reputation, like Bergier, so
long curé of Flangebouche; an astronomer of great merit, like M.
Mongin, curé of la Grand'Combe des Bois, whose works occupy an
honorable place in Lalande's bibliography, all passing their lives in
the midst of peasants.  At Rochejean, a priest of great intelligence
and fine feeling, M. Boillon, a distinguished naturalist, had
converted his house into a museum of natural history as well as into
an excellent school.  .  .  .  It was not rare to find priests
belonging to the highest social circles, like MM. de Trevillers, of
Trevillers, Balard de Bonnevaux of Bonétage, de Mesmay of Mesmay, du
Bouvot, at Osselle, cheerfully burying themselves in the depths of the
country, some on their family estates, and, not content to share their
income with their poor parishioners, but on dying, leaving them a
large part of their fortunes.

[74] De Tocqueville, "L'Ancien Regime," 134, 137.

[75] Terms signifying certain minor courts of law.

[76] Albert Babeau, "La Ville sous l'Ancien Régime," p.  26.  -
(Advertisements in the "Journal de Troyes," 1784, 1789.) "For sale,
the place of councillor in the Salt-department at Sézannes.  Income
from eight to nine hundred livres.  Price ten thousand livres." - "A
person desires to purchase in this town (Troyes) an office in the
Magistracy or Finances, at from twenty-five thousand to sixty thousand
livres; cash paid down if required."

[77] De Tocqueville, "L'Ancien Régime," p.356.  The municipal body of
Angers comprised, among other members, two deputies of the présidial,
two of the Forest and Streams department, two of the Election, two of
the Salt-department, two of the Customs, two of the Mint, two Council
judges.  The system of the ancient regime, universally, is the
grouping together of all individuals in one body with a representative
of all these bodies, especially those of the notables.  The municipal
body of Angers, consequently, comprises two deputies of the society of
lawyers and procureurs, two of the notarial body, one of the
University, one of the Chapter, a Syndic of the clerks, etc.  - At
Troyes (Albert Babeau," Histoire de Troyes Pendant la Révolution,"
p.23.) Among the notables of the municipality may be found one member
of the clergy, two nobles, one officer of the bailiwick, one officer
of the other jurisdictions, one physician, one or two bourgeois, one
lawyer, one notary or procureur, four merchants and two members of the
trade guild.

[78] Albert Babeau, "La Ville," p.26.  (Cf.  note on preceding page.)
The Collector's Office at Reteil, in 1746, is sold at one hundred and
fifty thousand livres; it brings in from eleven thousand to fourteen
thousand livres.  - The purchaser, besides, has to pay to the State
the "right of the golden marc" (a tax on the transfer of property); in
1762, this right amounted to nine hundred and forty livres for the
post of Councillor to the bailiwick of Troyes.  D'Esprémenil,
councillor in the Paris Parliament, had paid fifty thousand livres for
his place, besides ten thousand livres taxation of the "golden marc."

[79] Emile Bos, "Les Avocats au conseil du Roi," p.340.  Master
Peruot, procureur, was seated on the balcony of the Theatre Français
when Count Moreton Chabrillant arrives and wants his place.  The
procureur resists and the count calls the guard, who leads him off to
prison.  Master Peruot enters a complaint; there is a trial,
intervention of the friends of M. de Chabrillant before the garde des
sceaux, petitions of the nobles and resistance of the entire guild of
advocates and procureurs.  M. de Chabrillant, senior, offers Peruot
forty thousand livres to withdraw his suit, which Peruot refuses to
do.  Finally, the Count de Chabrillant is condemned, with six thousand
livres damages, (which are given to the poor and to prisoners), as
well as to the expense of printing two hundred impressions of the
verdict.  - Duport de Cheverney, " Mémoires," (unpublished),
communicated by M. Robert de Crevecceur: "Formerly a man paid fifty
thousand livres for an office with only three hundred livres income;
the consideration, however, he enjoyed through it, and the certainty
of remaining in it for life, compensated him for the sacrifice, while
the longer he kept it, the greater was the influence of himself and
children."

[80] Albert Babeau, " La Ville," p.  27; - "Histoire de Troyes," p.
21.  - This portrait is drawn according to recollections of childhood
and family narrations.  I happen to have known the details of two or
three small provincial towns, one of about six thousand inhabitants
where, before 1800, nearly all the notables, forty families, were
relations; to-day all are scattered.  The more one studies documents,
the more does Montesquieu's definition of the incentive of society
under the ancient régime seem profound and just, this incentive
consisting of honor.  In the bourgeoisie who were confounded with the
nobility, namely the Parliamentarians, their functions were nearly
gratuitous; the magistrate received his pay in deference.  (Moniteur,
V., 520.  Session of August 30, 1790, speech by d'Espremenil.) "Here
is what it cost a Councillor; I take myself as an example.  He paid
fifty thousand livres for his place, and ten thousand more for the tax
of the 'marc d'or.' He received three hundred and eighty-nine livres
ten sous salary, from which three hundred and sixty-seven livres
'capitation' had to be deducted.  The King allowed us forty-five
livres for extra service of 'La Tournelle'.  How about the fees? is
asked.  The (grande chambre) superior court, asserted to have received
the largest amount, was composed of one hundred and eighty members;
the fees amounted to two hundred and fifty thousand livres, which were
not a burden on the nation, but on the litigants.  M. Thouret, who
practiced in the Rouen parliament, will bear witness to this.  I
appeal to him to say conscientiously what sum a Councillor derived
from his office  - not five hundred livres .  .  .  When a judgment
cost the litigant nine hundred livres the King's portion was six
hundred Iivres .  .  .  To sum up, the profits of an office were seven
livres ten sous."

[81] Albert Babeau, "La Ville," ch.  II., and "Histoire de Troyes,"
I., ch.  1.  At Troyes, fifty merchants, notables, elected the judge-
consul and two consuls; the merchants' guild possessed its own hall
and had its own meetings.  At Paris, the drapers, mercers, grocers,
furriers, hatters and jewelers formed the six bodies of merchants.
The merchants' guild everywhere took precedence of other industrial
communities and enjoyed special privileges.  "The merchants," says
Loyseau, "hold rank (qualité d'honneur), being styled honorable men,
honest persons and bourgeois of the towns, qualifications not
attributed to husbandmen, nor to sergeants, nor to artisans, nor to
manual laborers." - On paternal authority and domestic discipline in
these old bourgeois families see the History of Beaumarchais and his
father.  (" Beaumarchais," by M. de Lomenie, vol.  I.)

[82] Albert Babeau, "Le village sous l'Ancien Régime," p.  56, ch.
III and IV., (on the village syndics), and pp.  357 and 359.  " The
peasants had the right to deliberate on their own affairs directly and
to elect their principal agents.  They understood their own needs,
were able to make a sacrifice for school and church .  .  .  .  for
repairs of the town clock and the belfry.  They appointed their own
agents and generally elected the most capable." - Ibid, "La Ville sous
1'Ancien Regime," p.29.  The artisans' guilds numbered at Paris one
hundred and twenty-four.  at Amiens sixty-four, and at Troyes fifty,
also Chalons-sur-Marne, at Angers twenty-seven.  The edicts of 1776
reduced them to forty-four at Paris, and to twenty as the maximum for
the principal towns within the jurisdiction of the Paris parliament.
- "Each guild formed a city within a city .  .  .  Like the communes,
it had its special laws, its selected chiefs, its assemblies, its own
building or, at least, a chamber in common, its banner, coat-of-arms
and colors." - Ibid., " Histoire de Troyes Pendant la Revolution," I.,
13, 329.  Trade guilds and corporations bear the following titles,
drawn up in 1789, from the files of complaints: apothecaries, jewelers
and watch-makers, booksellers and printers, master-barbers, grocers,
wax and candle-makers, bakers and tailors, master shoemakers, eating-
house-keepers, inn-keepers and hatters, master-masons and plasterers
in lime and cement, master-joiners, coopers and cabinet-makers,
master-cutlers, armorers, and polishers; founders, braziers, and pin-
makers; master-locksmiths, ironmongers, tinsmiths and other metal
workers, vinegar-makers, master-shearers, master rope-makers, master-
tanners, dealers and master-dyers and dressers; master saddle and
harness-makers, charcoal-burners, carters, paper-makers and band-box-
makers, cap-makers and associates in arts and trades.  - In some towns
one or two of these natural guilds kept up during the Revolution and
still exist, as, for example, that of the butchers at Limoges.

[83] F.  Leplay, "Les Ouvriers Européens," V., 456, 2nd ed., (on
workmen's guilds), Charpentier, Paris.

[84] F.  Leplay, "Les Quvriers Européens," (2nd ed.) IV., 377, and the
monographs of four families (Bordier of Lower Brittany, Brassier of
Armagnac, Savonnier of Lower Provence, Paysan of Lavedan, ch.  7, 8
and 9).  - Ibid., "L'Organization de la Famille," p.62, and the whole
volume.  - M. Leplay, in his exact, methodical and profound
researches, has rendered a service of the highest order to political
science and, consequently, to history.  He has minutely observed and
described the scattered fragments of the old organization of society;
his analysis and comparison of these fragments shows the thickness and
extent of the stratum almost gone, to which they belonged.  My own
observations on the spot, in many provinces in France, as well as the
recollections of my youth, agree with M. Leplay's discoveries.  - On
the stable, honest and prosperous families of small rural proprietors,
Cf.  Ibid., p.  68, (Arthur Young's observation in Béarn), and p.75.
Many of these families existed in 1789, more of them than at the
present time, especially in Gascony, Languedoc, Auvergne, Dauphiny,
Franch-Comté, Alsace and Normandy.  - Ibid., "L'Organization du
Travail," pp.499, 503, 508.  (Effects of the "Code Civile" on the
transmission of a manufactory and a business establishment in France,
and on cultivation in Savoy; the number of suits in France produced by
the system of forced partition of property.)

[85] F.  Leplay, "L'Organization de la Famille," p.212.  (History of
the Mélonga family from 1856 to 1869 by M. Cheysson.) Also p.269.
(On the difficulty of partitions among ascendants, by M. Claudio
Jannet.)

[86] Rétif de la Bretonne, "Vie de mon Pere," (paternal authority in a
peasant family in Burgundy).  The reader, on this point, may test the
souvenirs of his grand-parents.  With reference to the bourgeoisie I
have cited the family of Beaumarchais.  Concerning the nobles, see the
admirable letter by Buffon June 22, 1787, (correspondence of Buffon,
two vols., published by M. Nadaud de Buffon), telling his son how he
ought to act on account of his wife's behavior.

[87] Moniteur, XIX., 669.

[88] Dauban, " Paris en 1794," p.245.  (Report by Bacon, Ventôse 25,
year II.)

[89] Ibid.  (Report by Perrière, Ventôse 26.)

[90] Ironical, slang for a hog.  TR.

[91] Ibid., 245.  (Report by Bacon, speech of an orator to the general
assembly of the section "Contrat-Social," Ventôse 25.)

[92] "Un Sejour en France." (Sep., 1792.) Letter of a Parisian: "It is
not yet safe to walk the streets in decent clothes.  I have been
obliged to procure and put on pantaloons, jacket, colored cravat and
coarse linen, before attempting to go outdoors." - Beaulieu, "Essais,"
V., 281.  "Our dandies let their moustaches grow long; while they
rumpled their hair, dirtied their hands and donned nasty garments.
Our philosophers and literary men wore big fur caps with long fox-
tails dangling over their shoulders; some dragged great trailing
sabers along the pavement - they were taken for Tartars .  .  .  .  In
public assemblies, in the theatre boxes, nothing was seen in the front
rows but monstrous red bonnets.  All the galériens of all the convict
prisons in Europe seem to have come and set the fashion in this superb
city which had given it to all Europe." - " Un Séjour en France," p.
43.  (Amiens, September, 1792.) "Ladies in the street who are well-
dressed or wear colors that the people regard as aristocratic are
commonly insulted.  I, myself, have been almost knocked down for
wearing a straw hat trimmed with green ribbons." -  Nolhac, "Souvenirs
de Trois Années de la Révolution at Lyons," p.132.  "It was announced
that whoever had two coats was to fetch one of them to the Section, so
as to clothe some good republican and ensure the reign of equality."

[93] Buchez et Roux, XXVI., 455.  (Speech by Robespierre, in the
Jacobin club, May 10, 1793.): "The rich cherish hopes for an anti-
revolution; it is only the wretched, only the people who can save the
country." - Ibid., XXX.  (Report by Robespierre to the Convention,
December 25, 1793.): "Virtue is the appanage of the unfortunate and
the people's patrimony." - Archives Nationales, AF.,II., 72.  (Letter
of the municipality of Montauban, Vendémiaire 23, year IV.) Many
workmen in the manufactories have been perverted "by excited
demagogues and club orators who have always held out to them equality
of fortunes and presented the Revolution as the prey of the class they
called sans-culottes .  .  .  .  The law of the 'maximum,' at first
tolerably well carried out, the humiliation of the rich, the
confiscation of the immense possessions of the rich, seemed to be the
realization of these fine promises."

[94] Archives Nationales, F.7, 4421.  Petition of Madeleine Patris.  -
Petition of Quétrent Cogniér, weaver, "sans-culotte, and one of the
first members of the Troyes national guard." - (The Style and
orthography of the most barbarous kind.)

[95] bid., AF., II.  135.  (Extract from the deliberations of the
Revolutionary Committee of the commune of Strasbourg, list of
prisoners and reasons for arresting them.) At Oberschffolsheim, two
farmers "because they are two of the richest private persons in the
commune." - "Recueil de Pieces, etc.," I..  225.  (Declaration by
Welcher, revolutionary commissioner).  "I, the undersigned, declare
that, on the orders of citizen Clauer, commissioner of the canton, I
have surrendered at Strasbourg seven of the richest in
Obershffolsheim without knowing why." Four of the seven were
guillotined.

[96] Buchez et Roux, XXVI., 341.  (Speech by Chasles in the
Convention, May 2, 1793.)

[97] Moniteur, XVIII., 452.  (Speech by Hébert in the Jacobin club,
Brumaire 26.)-Schmidt, "Tableaux de la Révolution Française," 19.
(Reports of Dutard, June II.  - Archives Nationales.  F7., 31167.
(Report of the Pourvoyeur, Nivôse 6, year II.) "The people complain
(se plain) that there are still some conspirators in the interior,
such as butchers and bakers, but particularly the former, who are
(son) an intolerable aristocracy.  They (il) will sell no more meat,
etc.  It is frightful to see what they (il) give the people."

[98] "Recueil de Police," etc., I., 69 and 91.  At Strasbourg a number
of women of the lower class are imprisoned as "aristocrats and
fanatics," with no other alleged motive.  The following are their
occupations: dressmaker, upholsteress, housewife, midwife, baker,
wives of coffee-house keepers, tailors, potters and chimney-sweeps.  -
Ibid., II., 216.  "Ursule Rath, servant to an émigré arrested for the
purpose of knowing what her master had concealed.  .  .  .  Marie
Faber, on suspicion of having served in a priest's house." - Archives
Nationales, AF., II., 135.  (List of the occupations of the suspected
women detained in the cells of the National college.) Most of them are
imprisoned for being either mothers, sisters, wives or daughters of
émigrés or exiled priests, and many are the wives of shopkeepers or
mechanics.  One, a professional nurse, is an "aristocrat and fanatic."
(Another list describes the men); a cooper as "aristocrat;" a tripe-
seller as "very incivique, never having shown any attachment to the
Revolution;" a mason has never shown "patriotism," a shoemaker is
aristocrat at all times, having accepted a porter's place under the
tyrant;" four foresters "do not entertain patriotic sentiments," etc.
- "Recueil de Pièces, etc.," II., 220.  Citoyenne Genet, aged 75, and
her daughter, aged 44, are accused of having sent, May 22, 1792,
thirty-six francs in silver to the former's son, an émigré and were
guillotined.  - Cf.  Sauzay, vols.  III., IV., and V.  (appendices),
lists of émigrés and prisoners in Doubs, where titles and professions,
with motives for confining them, will be found.  - At Paris, even
(Archives Nationales, F.7, 31167.  report of Latour-Lamontagne,
September 20, 1793), aversion to the government descends very low.
"Three women (market-women) all agree on one point-the necessity of a
new order of things.  They complain of the authorities without
exception.  .  .  .  If the King is not on their lips, it is much to
be feared that he is already in their hearts.  A woman in the Faubourg
St.  Antoine, said: If our husbands made the Revolution we know how to
make a counter-revolution if that should be necessary."

[99] See above ch.  V., § 4.  - Archives Nationales, F.7, 4435, No.
10.  (Letter of Collot d'Herbois to Couthon, Frimaire 11, year II.)

[100] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.331.  (Letter of Bertrand,
Nîmes, Frimaire 3.) "We are sorry to see patriots here not very
delicate in the way they cause arrests, in ascertaining who are
criminal, and the precious class of craftsmen is no exception."

[101] Berryat Saint-Prix, "La Justice Révolutionnaire," 1st ed.,
p.229.

[102] "Un Séjour en France," p.  186.  "I notice that most of the
arrests now made are farmers." (In consequence of the requisitions for
grain, and on account of the applications of the law of the maximum.)

[103] "Bulletin du Tribunal Révolutionnaire," No.431.  (Testimony of
Tontin, secretary of the court.) Twelve hundred of these poor
creatures were set free after Thermidor 9.

[104] Moniteur, session of June 29, 1797.  (Report of Luminais.)
??Danican, "Les Brigands Démasqués," p.  194.

[105] Meillan, "Mémoires, p.  166.

[106] Berryat Saint-Prix, "La Justice Révolutionnaire," p.  419.  -
Archives Nationales, AF., II., 145.  (Orders issued by Representative
Maignet, Floréal 14, 15 and 17, year II.) "The criminal court will try
and execute the principal criminals; the rest of the inhabitants will
abandon their houses in twenty-four hours, and take their furniture
along with them.  The town will then be burnt.  All rebuilding or
tillage of the soil is forbidden.  The inhabitants will be apportioned
among neighboring communes; nobody is allowed to leave the commune
assigned to him under penalty of being treated as an emigré.  All must
appear once every ten days at the municipality under penalty of being
declared 'suspect' and imprisoned."

[107] "Recueil de Piecès, etc.," I., 52.  (Carret de Beudot and La
Coste, Pluviôse 6, year II.) "Whereas, it being impossible to find
jurors within an extent of one hundred leagues, two-thirds of the
inhabitants having emigrated." - Moniteur, Aug.28 and 29, 1797.
(Report by Harmand de la Meuse.) - Ibid., XIX., 714.  (Session of
Ventôse 26, year II., speech by Baudot.) "Forty thousand persons of
all ages and both sexes in the districts alone of Haguenau and
Wissembourg, fled from the French territory on the lines being
retaken.  The names are in our hands, their furniture in the depot at
Saverne and their property is made over to the Republic."

[108] Albert Babeau, "Histoire de Troyes," II., 160.  "A gardener had
carefully accumulated eight thousand two hundred and twenty-three
livres in gold, the fruit of his savings; threatened with
imprisonment, he was obliged to give them up."

[109] Archives Nationales, AF.,II., 116.  (Orders of Representative
Paganel, Toulouse, Brumaire 12, year II.) "The day has arrived when
apathy is an insult to patriotism, and indifference a crime.  We no
longer reply to the objections of avarice; we will force the rich to
fulfill the duties of fraternity which they have abjured." - Ibid.
(Extract from the minutes of the meetings of the Central committee of
Montauban, April II, 1793, with the approval of the representative,
Jeanbon-Saint-André.) "The moment has at length come when moderatism,
royalism and pusillanimity, and all other traitorous or useless sects
to the country, should disappear from the soil of Liberty." All
opinions opposed to those of sans-culotterie are blamable and merit
punishment.

[110] Archives Nationales, F.7, 2471.  (Minutes of the Revolutionary
Committee of the Tuileries section, meeting of September 17, 1793.)
List of seventy-four persons put under arrest and among them, M. de
Noailles, with the following note opposite his name: "The entire
family to be arrested, including their heir Guy, and Hervet, their old
intendant, rue St.  Honoré."

[111] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  322.  (Letters of
Ladonay, Chalons, September 17 and 20, 1792.) "At Meaux, the brigands
have cut the throats of fifteen prisoners, seven of whom are priests
whose relations belong to the town or its environs.  Hence an immense
number of malcontents." - Sauzay, I., 97.  "The country curés are
generally recruited from among the rural bourgeoisie and the most
respected farmers' families."

[112] Sauzay, passim, especially vols.  3, 4, 5, and 6.

[113] Archives Nationales, F.7, 4437.  Address of the popular club of
Clavisson (Gard.), Messidor 7, year II.  - Rodolphe Reuss, "Séligman
Alexandre, sur les Tribulations d'un Israelite Strasbourgeois Pendant
la Terreur," p.  37.  Order issued by General Diéche to Coppin, in
command of the "Seminaire" prison.  "Strive with the utmost zeal to
suppress the cackle of aristocrats." Such is the sum of the
instructions to jail keepers.

[114] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 88.  (Edict issued by
Representative Milhaud, Narbonne, Ventôse 9, year II.) Article II.
"The patriotic donation will be doubled if, in three days, all boats
are not unloaded and all carts loaded as fast as they arrive." Article
IV.  "The municipality is charged, on personal responsibility, to
proportion the allotment on the richest citizens of Narbonne." Article
VII.  "If this order is not executed within twenty-four hours, the
municipality will designate to the commandant of the post the rich
egoists who may have refused to furnish their contingent, etc."
Article VIII.  "The commandant is specially charged to report (the
arrests of the refractory rich) to the representative of the people
within twenty-four hours, he being responsible on his head for the
punctual execution of the present order." - Ibid., AF., II.  135.
(Orders of Saint-Just and Lebas, Strasbourg, Brumaire 10, year II.)
The following is equally ironical; the rich of Strasbourg are
represented as "soliciting a loan on opulent persons and severe
measures" against refractory egoists.

[115] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 92.  Orders of Representative
Taillefer, Villefranche, Aveyron, Brumaire 3, year II., and of his
delegate, Deitheil, Brumaire 11, year II.

[116] This is the case in Lyons, Bordeaux, Marseilles, and at Paris,
as we see in the signatures of the petition of the eight thousand, or
that of the twenty thousand, and for members of the Feuillants clubs,
etc.

[117] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 116.  (Minutes of the public
session of Ventôse 20, year II., held at Montargis, in the Temple of
Reason, by Benon, "national agent of the commune and special agent of
the people's representative." Previous and subsequent orders, by
Representative Lefert.) Eighty-six persons signed, subject to public
penance, among them twenty-four wives or widows, which, with the four
names sent to the Paris tribunal and the thirty-two imprisoned, makes
one hundred and twenty-two.  It is probable that the one hundred and
six who are wanting to complete the list of two hundred and twenty-
eight had emigrated, or been banished in the interval as unsworn
priests.  - Ibid., D.S., I., 10.  (Orders by Delacroix, Bouchet and
Legendre, Conches, Frimaire 8 and 9, year II.) The incarceration of
the municipal officers of Conches for an analogous petition and other
marks of Feuillantism.

[118] The real sentiments and purposes of the Jacobins are well shown
at Strasbourg.  ("Recueil de Pieces, etc.," I., 77.  Public meeting of
the municipal body, and speech by Bierlyn, Prairial 25, year II.) "
How can the insipid arrogance of these (Strasbourg) people be
represented to you, their senseless attachment to the patrician
families in their midst, the absurd feuil1antism of some and the vile
sycophancy of others? How is it, they say, that moneyless interlopers,
scarcely ever heard of before, dare assume to have credit in a town of
sensible inhabitants and honest families, from father to son,
accustomed to governing and renowned for centuries?" - Ibid., 113.
(Speech of the mayor Mouet, Floréal 21, year II.) "Moral purification
(in Strasbourg) has become less difficult through the reduction of
fortunes and the salutary terror excited among those covetous men .  .
.  Civilization has encountered mighty obstacles in this great number
of well-to-do families who have nourished souvenirs of, and who regret
the privileges enjoyed by, these families under the Emperors; they
have formed a caste apart from the State carefully preserving the
gothic pictures of their ancestors they were united only amongst
themselves.  They are excluded from all public functions.  Honest
artisans, now taken from all pursuits, impel the revolutionary cart
with a vigorous hand."

[119] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  1411.  (Instructions for
the civil commissioners by Hérault, representative of the people,
Colmar, Frimaire 2, year II.) He enumerates the diverse categories of
persons who were to be arrested, which categories are so large and
numerous as to include nine out of ten of the inhabitants.

[120] Dauban, "Paris en 1794," p.264.  (Report of Pourveyeur, Ventôse
29.) "They remark (sic) that one is not (sic) a patriot with twenty-
thousand livres (sic) income, and especially a former advocate-
general."

[121] De Martel, "Fouché," p.226, 228.  For instance, at Nevers, a man
of sixty-two years of age, is confined "as rich, egoist, fanatic,
doing nothing for the Revolution, a proprietor, and having five
hundred livres revenue."

[122] Buchez et Roux, XXVI., '77.  (Speech by Cambon, April 27, 1793.)

[123] "Who are our enemies? The vicious and the rich." - " All the
rich are vicious, in opposition to the Revolution." (Notes made by
Robespierre in June and July, 1793, and speech by him in the Jacobin
club, May 10, 1793.)

[124] Guillon, II., 355.  (Instructions furnished by Collot d'Herbois
and Fouché, Brumaire 26, year II.)

[125] De Martel, 171, 181.  (Orders of Fouché, Nevers, August 25 and
October 8, 1793.)

[126] Guillon.-Archives des Affaires étrangères, F.  1411.  Reports by
observers at Paris, Aug.  12 and 13, 1793.  "The rich man is the sworn
enemy of the Revolution."

[127] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 135.  (Orders of Saint-Just and
Lebas, Strasbourg, Brumaire 10, year II., with the list of names of
one hundred and ninety-three persons taxed, together with their
respective amounts of taxation.) - Among others, "a widow Franck,
banker, two hundred thousand livres." - Ibid., AF., II., 49.
(Documents relating to the revolutionary tax at Belfort.) "Vieillard,
Moderate and egoist, ten thousand francs; Keller, rich egoist, seven
thousand; as aristocrats, of whom the elder and younger brother are
imprisoned, Barthélémy the younger ten thousand, Barthélémy senior,
three thousand five hundred, Barthelemy junior seven thousand,
citoyenne Barthélémy, mother, seven thousand, etc."

[128] "Recueil de Pièces, etc.," I., 22.  (Letter of the Strasbourg
authorities.) De Martel, p.  288.  (Letter of the authorities of
Allier.) "Citizens Sainay, Balome, Heulard and Lavaleisse were exposed
on the scaffold in the most rigorous season for six hours (at Moulins)
with this inscription - "bad citizen who has given nothing to the
charity-box."

[129] "Recueil de Pièces, etc.," I., 16.

[130] Ibid., I., 159.  (Orders of Brumaire 15, year II.)

[131] Archives Nationales, F.7, 2475.  (Minutes of the Revolutionary
committee of the Piques section.) September 9, 1793, at 3 o'clock in
the morning, the committee declares that, for its part, "it has
arrested twenty-one persons of the category below stated." October 8,
it places two sans-culottes as guards in the houses of all those named
below, in the quarter, even those who could not be arrested on account
of absence.  "It is time to take steps to make sure of all whose
indifference (sic) and moderatism is ruining the country."

[132] Berryat Saint-Prix, pp.36, 38.  carrier declares suspect
"merchants and the rich."

[133] Moniteur, XVIII., 641.  (Letter of the representatives
imprisoned at Bordeaux, Frimaire 10, year II.)

[134] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.329.  (Letter of Brutus,
October 3, 1793.)

[135] Ibid., vol.329.  (Letter of Charles Duvivier, Lille, Vendémiaire
15, year II.)

[136] Speech by Barère, Ventôse 17, year II.

[137] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  331.  Letter by
Darbault, political agent, Tarbes, Frimaire II, year II.  (Project for
doing away with middle men in trade, brokers and bankers.) "The
profession of a banker is abolished.  All holders of public funds are
forbidden to sell them under a year and one day after the date of
their purchase.  No one must be at the same time wholesale and retail
dealer, etc." Projects of this sort are numerous.  As to the
establishment of a purely agricultural and military Republic, see the
papers of Saint-Just, and the correspondence of the Lyons Terrorists.
According to them the new France needs no silk-weavers.  The definite
formulas of the system are always found among the Babeuvists.  "Let
the arts perish, if it must be so, provided real Equality remains."
(Sylvain Maréchal," Maniféste des Egaux.")

[138] "Revue Historique," November, 1878.  (Letter of M. Falk, Paris,
Oct.19, 1795.)

[139] "Etude sur l'histoire de Grenoble Pendant la Terreur," by Paul
Thibault.  (List of notorious "suspects" and of ordinary "suspects"
for each district in the Isere, April and May, 1793.) - Cf.  the
various lists of Doubs in Sauzay, and of Troyes, in Albert Babeau.

[140] "Recueil de Pièces, etc.," I., 19, and the second letter of
Frederic Burger, Thermidor 25.  - Archives Nationales, AF.,
II.,111.(Order of Representatives Merlincourt and Amar, Grenoble,
April 27, 1793.) "The persons charged with the actual government of
and instruction in the public establishments known in this town under
the titles of, 1st, Orphelines; 2nd  Presentins; 3rd Capuchins; 4th ,
Le Propagation; 5th , Hospice for female servants.  .  .  .  are put
under arrest and are forbidden to take any part whatever in the
functions relating to teaching, education or instruction."

[141] Moniteur, XXI., 645.  (Session of the Convention, Fructidor 14,
year II.) - "Bibliotèque nationale," LB41, 1802, (Denounciation of the
six sections of the commune of Dijon), 3: "Woe betide those are seen
in any way, either due to an honest affluence, a good education, an
elegant dress or some talent or other, as being different from their
fellow citizens! They are likely to be persecuted or to be killed."

[142] Perhaps there is a connection with Mao Zedong and the Chinese
Cultural Revolution.  (SR.)

[143] Moniteur, XVIII., 51.  (Letter by Carrier, Brumaire 17, year
II.) - Berryat Saint-Prix, pp.36 and 38.

[144] Berriat-Saint-Prix, 240 (The imprisoned at Brest.) -
Duchaltelier ("Brest pendant la Terreur," 205).  Of the 975 prisoners,
106 were former nobles, 239 female nobles, 174 priests or monks, 206
nuns, 111 seamstresses, female workers etc, 56 were farmers, 46
artisans or workers, 17 merchants, 3 with a liberal profession.  One
is imprisoned for having secret opinions" a girl, "for being witty and
laughing at the patriots."

[145] Mallet-Dupan, "Correspondance Politique." Introduction, p.
VIII.  (Hamburg, 1796.)

[146] Portalis, "De la Révision des Jugements," 1795.  (Saint-Beuve,
"Causeries du Lundi," V., 452.) - Moniteur.  XXII, 86 (Report of
Grégoire, 14 Fructidor, year II): "Dumas said that all clever men (les
hommes d'esprit) should be sent to the guillotine.  .  .  Henriot
proposed to burn the National Library.  .  .  .  and his proposal is
repeated in Marseille.  .  .  The systematic persecution of talented
persons was organized.  .  .  .  " Shouts had been heard in the
sections: "Beware of that man as he as written a book."

[147] "Tableau des Prisons de Toulouse" by Pescayre, prisoner, year
III, p.  317 ( Messidor 22nd, year II).  Pinson, secretary of the
reception, indoctrinated as follows the old duke de Lesparre:
"Citoyen, your detention is used by your country as a means of
conversion.  Eight of your immediate family have, because they did not
take advantage of his opportunity, carried their heads to the
scaffold.  What have you done to avoid the sword of justice?  Speak!
What are your feelings? Let us hear your principles.  Have you at last
renounced the arrogance of the ancient regime? Do you believe in
equality established by nature and ordained by the Convention? Who are
the sans-culottes you associate with? Is your cell not a meeting place
for the aristocrats? .  .  .  It is I, who in the future will be your
company; I, who will make you familiar with the republican principles,
who will make you love them, and who will take care of your
improvement."

[148] Taillandier, Mémoires écrits par Daunau, à Port-Libre, in Aug.
1794, p.51, 52.

[149] Granier du Cassagnac, "Histoire du Directoire," i., 107.  (Trial
of Babeuf, extracts from Buonarotti, programme des "Egaux.") All
literature in favor of Revelation must be prohibited: children are to
be brought up in common; the child will no longer bear his father's
name; no Frenchman shall leave France; towns shall be demolished,
chateaux torn down and books proscribed; all Frenchmen shall wear one
special costume; armies shall be commanded by civil magistrates; the
dead shall be prosecuted and obtain burial only according to the
favorable decision of the court; no written document shall be
published without the consent of the government, etc." - Cf.  "Les
Meditations de Saint-Just."

[150] Guillon de Montléon, II., 174.

[151] "Memoires sur les Prisons," I., 211, II., 187.  - Beaulieu,
"Essais," V., 320.  "The prisons became the rendezvous of good
society."

[152]  "The Revolution," vol.3, ch.  6, ante.

[153] Chateaubriand: "Génie du Christianisme," part 4, book II., notes
on the exhumations at St.  Denis taken by a monk, an eye-witness.
Destruction, August 6 and 8, 1793, of fifty-one monuments.  Exhumation
of bodies, October 12 and 25, 1793.  - Camille Boursier, "Essai sur la
Terreur en Anjou," p.223.  (Testimony of Bordier-Langlois.) "I saw the
head of our good Duke Réné, deposited in the chapel of St.  Bernardin,
in the Cordéliers at Angers, tossed like a ball by some laborers from
one to the other."

[154] R.  Chantelauze, "Louis XVII.," (according to unpublished
documents).  This book, free of declamation and composed according to
the critical method, sets this question at rest.

[155] Wallon, "Histoire du Tribunal Revolutionnaire," III., 285.  -
Campardon, "Hist.  du Tribunal Révolutionnaire de Paris," I., 306.
Brochet, one of the jury, was formerly a lackey.

[156] The above simply conveys the sense of the document, which is
here given in the original: "Si tu n'est pas toute seulle et que le
compagnion soit a travailier tu peus ma chaire amie venir voir juger
24 mesieurs tous si-deven président on conselier au parlement de Paris
et de Toulouse.  Je t' ainvite a prendre quelque choge aven de venir
parcheque nous naurons pas fini de 3 hurres.  Je tembrase ma chère
amie et épouge." (TR).

[157] Wallon, III., 402.

[158] Campardon, II., 350.  -  Cf.  Causeries du Lundi," II., 164.
Saint-Beuve's comment on the examination.  "André Chénier, natife de
Constantinoble....son frère vice-consulte en Espagne.  "Remark the
questions on his health and correspondence and the cock-and-bull story
about the 'maison a cotté.' " - They ask him where his servant was on
the 10th of August, 1792, and he replies that he could not tell.  "A
lui representé qua lepoque de cette journee que touts les bons
citoyent ny gnoroit point leurs existence et quayant enttendue batte
la générale cettait un motife de plus pour reconnoitre tous les bons
citoyent et le motife au quelle il setait employée pour sauvee la
Republique.  A repondue quil avoit dite l'exacte véritée.  A lui
demandée quel etoit dite l'exacte veritée -  a repondue que cetoit
toutes ce qui etoit cy dessue."



CHAPTER II.   Food and Provisions.

I.   Economical Complexity of Food Chain.

Complexity of the economical operation by which articles of prime
necessity reach the consumer.-  Conditions of the operation.   -
Available resources.   - Cases in which these are not available.   -
Case of the holder of these being no longer disposed to make them.

Suppose a man forced to walk with his feet in the air and his head
downward.  By using extremely energetic measures he might, for a
while, be made to maintain this unwholesome attitude, and certainly at
the expense of a bruised or broken skull; it is very probable,
moreover, that he would use his feet convulsively and kick terribly.
But it is certain that if this course were persisted in, the man would
experience intolerable pain and finally sink down; the blood would
stop circulating and suffocation would ensue; the trunk and limbs
would suffer as much as the head, and the feet would become numb and
inert.  - Such is more or less the history of France under its Jacobin
pedagogues; their rigid theory and persistent brutality impose on the
nation an attitude against nature; consequently she suffers, and each
day suffers more and more; the paralysis increases; the functions get
out of order and cease to act, while the last and principal one,[1]
the most urgent, namely, physical support and the daily nourishment of
the living individual, is so badly accomplished, against so many
obstacles, interruptions, uncertainties and deficiencies, that the
patient, reduced to extreme want, asks if to-morrow will not be worse
than to-day, and whether his semi-starvation will not end in complete
starvation.

Nothing, apparently, is simpler, and yet really more complex, than the
physiological process by which, in the organized body, the proper
restorative food flows regularly to the spot where it is needed, among
the innumerably diverse and distant cells.  In like manner, nothing is
simpler at the first glance, and yet more complex, than the economical
process by which, in the social organism, provisions and other
articles of prime necessity, flow of themselves to all points of the
territory where they are needed and within reach of each consumer.  It
is owing to this that, in the social body as in the organized body,
the terminal act presupposes many others anterior to and co-ordinate
with it, a series of elaborations, a succession of metamorphoses, one
elimination and transportation after another, mostly invisible and
obscure, but all indispensable, and all of them carried out by
infinitely delicate organs, so delicate that, under the slightest
pressure, they get out of order, so dependent on each other that an
injury to one affects the operations of the rest, and thus suppresses
or perverts the final result to which, nearly or remotely, they all
contribute.

Consider, for a moment, these precious economical organs and their
mode of operation.  In any tolerably civilized community that has
lasted for any length of time, they consist, first in rank, of those
who possess wealth arising from the accumulation of old and recent
savings, that is to say, those who possess any sort of security, large
or small, in money, in notes, or in kind, whatever its form, whether
in lands, buildings or factories, in canals, shipping or machinery, in
cattle or tools, as well as in every species of merchandise or
produce.  - And see what use they make of these: each person,
reserving what he needs for daily consumption, devotes his available
surplus to some enterprise, the capitalist his ready money, the real-
estate owner his land and tenements, the farmer his cattle, seed and
farming implements, the manufacturer his mills and raw material, the
common-carrier his vessels, vehicles and horses, the trader his
warehouses and stock of goods for the year, and the retailer his shop
and supplies for a fortnight.  To which everybody, the agriculturist,
merchant and manufacturer, necessarily adds his cash on hand, the
deposits in his bank for paying the monthly salaries of his clerks,
and at the end of the week, the wages of his workmen.  - Otherwise, it
would be impossible to till the soil, to build, to fabricate, to
transport, to sell; however useful the work might be, it could not be
perfected, or even begun, without a preliminary outlay in money or in
kind.  In every enterprise, the crop presupposes labor and seed corn.
If I want to dig a hole I am obliged to hire a pick and the arms to
wield it, or, in other terms, to make certain advances.  But these
advances are made only on two conditions: first, that he who makes
them is able to make them, that is to say, that he is the possessor of
an available surplus; and next, being the owner of this surplus, that
he desires to make them, with this proviso that he may gain instead of
losing by the operation.  - If I am wholly or partially ruined, if my
tenants and farmers do not pay their rent,[2] if my lands or goods do
not bring half their value in the market, if the net proceeds of my
possessions are threatened with confiscation or pillage, not only have
I fewer securities to dispose of, but, again, I become more and more
uneasy about the future; over and above my immediate consumption I
have to provide for a prospective consumption; I add to my reserve
stores especially of coin and provisions; I hold on to the remnant of
my securities for myself and those who belong to me; they are no
longer available and I can no longer make loans or enter upon my
enterprise.  And, on the other hand, if the loan or enterprise,
instead of bringing me a profit, brings me loss; if the law is
powerless or fails to do me justice and adds extra to ordinary risks;
if my work once perfected is to become the prey of the government, of
brigands or of whoever pleases to seize it; if I am compelled to
surrender my wares and merchandise at one-half their cost; if I cannot
produce, put in store, transport or sell except by renouncing all
profit and with the certainty of not getting back my advances, I will
no longer make loans or enter upon any under-taking whatever.

Such is the disposition and situation of people able to make advances
in anarchical times, when the State falters and no longer performs its
customary service, when property is no longer adequately protected by
the public force, when jacqueries overspread the country and
insurrections break out in the towns, when chateaux are sacked,
archives burnt, shops broken into, provisions carried off and
transportation is brought to a halt, when rents and leases are no
longer paid, when the courts dare no longer convict, when the
constable no longer dares serve a warrant, when the gendarmerie holds
back, when the police fails to act, when repeated amnesties shield
robbers and incendiaries, when a revolution brings into local and
central power dishonest and impoverished adventurers hostile to every
one that possesses property of any kind.  - Such is the disposition
and situation of all who are in possession of the means to initiate
projects in socialistic times

* when the usurping State, instead of protecting private property,
destroys or seizes it;
* when it takes for itself the property of many of the great
corporations;
* when it suppresses legally established credits without indemnity;
* when, by dint of expenditure and the burdens this creates, it
becomes insolvent;
* when, through its paper-money and forced circulation, it annuls
indebtedness in the hands of the creditor, and allows the debtor to go
scot-free;
* when it arbitrarily seizes current capital;
* when it makes forced loans and requisitions;
* when its tax on productions surpasses the cost of production and on
merchandise the profit on its sale;
* when it constrains the manufacturer to manufacture at a loss and the
merchant to sell at a loss;
* when its principles, judged by its acts, indicate a progression from
partial to a universal confiscation.  -

Ineluctably every phase of disease engenders the evil which follows:
it is like a poison the effects of which spread or pass onwards.  Each
function, affected by the derangement of the adjacent one, becoming
disturbed in its turn.  The perils, mutilation and suppression of
property diminish available securities as well as the courage that
risks them, that is to say, the mode of, and disposition to, make
advances.  Through a lack of funds, useful enterprises languish, die
out or are not undertaken.  Consequently, the production, supply, and
sale of indispensable articles slacken, become interrupted and cease
altogether.  There is less soap and sugar and fewer candles at the
grocery, less wood and coal in the wood-yard, fewer oxen and sheep in
the markets, less meat at the butcher's, less grain and flour at the
corn-exchange, and less bread at the bakeries.  As articles of prime
necessity are scarce they become dear; as people contend for them
their dearness increases; the rich man ruins himself in the struggle
to get hold of them, while the poor man never gets any, and the bare
necessities become unattainable.

II.  Conditions in 1793.  A Lesson in Market Economics.

Economical effect of the Jacobin policy from 1789 to 1793.  - Attacks
on property.  - Direct attacks.  - Jacqueries, effective confiscations
and proclamation of the socialist creed.  - Indirect attacks.  - Bad
administration of the public funds.  - Transformation of taxation and
insignificance of the returns.  - Increased expenditures.  - The War-
budget and subsistence after 1793.  - Paper money.  - Enormous issues
of it.  - Credit of the Assignats run down.  - Ruin of Public
creditors and of all private credit.  - Rate of interest during the
Revolution.  - Stoppage of trade and industry.  - Bad management of
new land-owners.  - Decrease of productive labor.  - Only the small
rural land-owner works advantageously.  - Why he refuses Assignats.  -
He is no longer obliged to sell his produce at once.  - High cost of
food.  - It reaches a market with difficulty and in small quantities.
- The towns buy at a high price and sell at a low one.  - Food becomes
dearer and famine begins.  - Prices during the first six months of
1793.

Such is the hardship in France at the moment when the Jacobin conquest
has been completed, a misery of which the Jacobins are the cause due
to the systematic war they have waged against property during the
preceding four years.

From below, they have provoked, excused, amnestied, or tolerated and
authorized all the popular attacks on property,[3] countless
insurrections, seven successive jacqueries, some of them so extensive
as to cover eight or ten departments at the same time.  The last one
let loose on all France a universal and lasting brigandage, the
arbitrary rule of paupers, vagabonds and ruffians; every species of
robbery, from a refusal to pay rents and leases to the sacking of
chateaux and ordinary domiciles, even to the pillage of markets and
granaries.  Free scope was given to mobs which, under a political
pretext, tax and ransom the "suspects " of all classes at pleasure,
not alone the noble and the rich but the peaceable farmer and well-to-
do artisan.  In short, the country reverted back to a natural state,
the sovereignty of appetites, greed and lust, to mankind's return to a
savage, primitive life in the forests.  Only a short time before, in
the month of February, 1793, through Marat's recommendation, and with
the connivance of the Jacobin municipality, the Paris riff-raff had
broken into twelve hundred groceries and divided on the spot, either
gratis or at the price it fixed, sugar, soap, brandy and coffee.

From above, they had undertaken, carried out and multiplied the worst
assaults on property, vast spoliations of every sort; the suppression
of hundreds of millions of incomes and the confiscation of billions of
capital; the abolition without indemnity of tithes and quitrents; the
expropriation of the property of the clergy, of emigrés, that of the
order of Malta, that of the pious, charitable and educational
associations and endowments, even laic; seizures of plate, of the
sacred vessels and precious ornaments of the churches.  And, because
they have the power, others still more vast.  After August 10, their
newspapers in Paris and their commissioners in the departments,[4]
have preached

 "the agrarian law, the holding of all property in common, the
leveling of fortunes, the right of each fraction of the sovereign
people" to help itself by force to all food and stores at the expense
of the owner, to hunt down the rich, proscribe "land-owners, leading
merchants, financiers and all men in possession of whatever is
superfluous."

Rousseau's dogma that "the fruit belongs to everybody and the soil to
no one" is established at an early date as a maxim of State in the
Convention, while in the deliberations of the sovereign assembly
socialism, openly avowed, becomes ascendant, and, afterwards, supreme.
According to Robespierre,[5]

"whatever is essential to preserve life is common property to society
at large.  It is only the excess which may be given up to individuals
and surrendered to commercial enterprise."

With still greater solemnity, the pontiff of the sect, in the
Declaration of Rights which, unanimously adopted by the all-powerful
Jacobin club, is to serve as the corner-stone of the new institutions,
pens the following formula heavy with their consequences:[6]

"Society must provide for the support of all its members.  The aid
required by indigence is a debt of the rich to the poor.  The right of
property is limited, and applies only to that portion which the law
guarantees.  Every ownership, any trade, which bears prejudicially on
the existence of our fellow-creatures is necessarily illicit and
immoral."

The meaning of this is more than clear: the Jacobin populace, having
decided that the possession of, and trade in, groceries was
prejudicial to its existence, the grocers' monopoly is, therefore,
immoral and illicit, and consequently, it pillages their shops.  Under
the rule of the populace and of the "Mountain," the Convention applies
the theory, seizes capital wherever it can be found, and notifies the
poor, in its name,

"that they will find in the pocket-books of the rich whatever they
need to supply their wants."[7]

Over and above these striking and direct attacks, an indirect and
hidden attack, even more significant, which slowly undermines the
basis of all present and future property.  State affairs are
everybody's affairs, and, when the State ruins itself, everybody is
ruined along with it.  For, it is the country's greatest debtor and
its greatest creditor, while there is no debtor so free of seizure and
no creditor so absorbing, since, making the laws and possessing the
force, it can, firstly, repudiate indebtedness and send away the fund-
holder with empty hands, and next, increase taxation and empty the
taxpayer's pocket of his last penny.  There is no greater menace to
private fortunes than the bad administration of the public fortune.
Now, under the pressure of Jacobin principles and of the Jacobin
faction, the trustees of France have administered the country as if
they purposely meant to ruin their ward; every known means for wasting
a fortune have been brought into play by them.  - In the first place,
they have deprived him of three-fourths of his income.  To please the
people and enforce the theory, the taxes on articles consumed, on
salt, with the excise subsidies and the octroi duties on liquors,
meat, tobacco, leather and gunpowder, have been abolished, while the
new imposts substituted for the old ones, slowly fixed, badly
apportioned and raised with difficulty have brought in no returns.  On
the 1st of February, 1793,[8] the Treasury had received on the real
and personal taxation of 1791, but one hundred and fifty millions
instead of three hundred millions.  On the same taxes for 1792,
instead of three hundred millions it had obtained nothing at all.  At
this date, and during the four years of the Revolution, the total
arrears of taxation amounted to six hundred and thirty-two millions -
a bad debt that can hardly be recovered, and, in fact, it is already
reduced one-half, since, even if the debtor could and was disposed to
pay, he would pay in assignats, which, at this time, were at a discount
of fifty per cent.  - In the second place, the new managers had
quadrupled the public expenditure.[9] What with the equipment and
excursions of the National Guards federations, patriotic festivals
and parades, the writing, printing and publication of innumerable
documents, reimbursements for suppressed offices, the installation
of new administrations, aid to the indigent and to its charity
workshops, purchases of grain, indemnities to millers and bakers,
it was under the necessity of providing for the cost of the
universal demolition and reconstruction.  Now, the State had, for the
most part, defrayed all these expenses.  At the end of April, 1793, it
had already advanced to the city of Paris alone, one hundred and ten
million francs, while the Commune, insolvent, kept constantly
extorting fresh millions.[10] By the side of this gulf, the Jacobins
had dug another, larger still, that of the war.  For the first half of
the year 1793 they threw into this pit first, one hundred and forty
millions, then one hundred and sixty millions, and then one hundred
and ninety million francs; in the second six months of 1793 the war
and provisions swallowed up three hundred million francs per month,
and the more they threw into the two gulfs the deeper they became.[11]

Naturally, when there is no collecting a revenue and expenses go on
increasing, one is obliged to borrow on one's resources, and
piecemeal, as long as these last.  Naturally, when ready money is not
to be had on the market, one draws notes and tries to put them in
circulation; one pays tradesmen with written promises in the future,
and thus exhausts one's credit.  Such is paper money and the
assignats, the third and most efficient way for wasting a fortune and
which the Jacobins did not fail to make the most of.  - Under the
Constituent Assembly, through a remnant of good sense and good faith,
efforts were at first made to guarantee the fulfillment of written
promises the holders of assignats were almost secured by a first
mortgage on the national possessions, which had been given to them
coupled with an engagement not to raise more money on this guarantee,
as well as not to issue any more assignats.[12] But they did not keep
faith.  They rendered the security afforded by this mortgage
inoperative and, as all chances of re-payment disappeared, its value
declined.  Then, on the 27th of April, 1792, according to the report
of Cambon, there begins an unlimited issue; according to the Jacobin
financiers, nothing more is necessary to provide for the war than to
turn the wheel and grind out promises to pay: in June, 1793, assignats
to the amount of four billion three hundred and twenty millions have
already been manufactured, and everybody sees that the mill must grind
faster.  This is why the guarantee, vainly increased, no longer
suffices for the monstrous, disproportionate mortgage; it exceeds all
limits, covers nothing, and sinks through its own weight.  At Paris,
the assignat of one hundred francs is worth in specie, in the month of
June, 1791, eighty-five francs, in January, 1792, only sixty-six
francs, in March, 1792, only fifty.  three francs; rising in value at
the end of the Legislative Assembly, owing to fresh confiscations, it
falls back to fifty-five francs in January, 1793, to forty-seven
francs in April, to forty francs in June, to thirty-three francs in
July.[13] - Thus are the creditors of the State defrauded of a third,
one-half, and two-thirds of their investment, and not alone the
creditors of the State but every other creditor, since every debtor
has the right to discharge his obligations by paying his debts in
assignats.  Enumerate, if possible, all who are defrauded of private
claims, all money-lenders and stockholders who have invested in any
private enterprise, either manufacturing or mercantile, those who have
loaned money on Contracts of longer or shorter date, all sellers of
real estate, with stipulations in their deeds for more or less remote
payment, all landowners who have leased their grounds or buildings for
a term of years, all holders of annuities on private bond or on an
estate, all manufacturers, merchants and farmers who have sold their
wares, goods and produce on time, all clerks on yearly salaries and
even all other employees, underlings, servants and workmen receiving
fixed salaries for a specified term.  There is not one of these
persons whose capital, or income payable in assignats, is not at once
crippled in proportion to the decline in value of assignats, so that
not only the State falls into bankruptcy but likewise every creditor
in France, legally bankrupt along with it through its fault.

In such a situation how can any enterprise be commenced or maintained?
Who dares take a risk, especially when disbursements are large and
returns remote? Who dares lend on long credits - ? If loans are still
made they are not for a year but for a month, while the interest
which, before the Revolution was six, five or even four per cent.  per
annum, is now two per cent.  a month on securities." It soon runs up
higher and, at Paris and Strasbourg we see it rising, as in India and
the Barbary States, to four, five, six and even seven per cent.  a
month.[14]

What holder of raw material, or of manufactured goods, would dare make
entries on his books as usual and allow his customer the indispensable
credit of three months? What large manufacturer would presume to make
goods up, what wholesale merchant would care to make shipments, what
man of wealth or with a competence would build, drain and construct
dams and dykes, repair, or even maintain them with the positive
certainty of delays in getting back only one-half his outlays and with
the increasing certainty of getting nothing?

During a few years the large establishments collapsed in droves:

* After the ruin of the nobles and the departure of wealthy
foreigners, every craft dependent on luxurious tastes, those of Paris
and Lyons, which were the standard for Europe, all the manufactories
of rich fabrics and furniture, and other artistic, elegant and
fashionable articles.

* After the insurrection of the blacks in St.  Domingo, and other
troubles in the West Indies, the great colonial trade and remarkable
prosperity of Nantes and Bordeaux, including all the industrial
enterprises by which the production, transportation and circulation of
cotton, sugar and coffee were affected;[15]

* After the declaration of war with England, the shipping interest;

* After the declaration of war with all Europe, the commerce of the
continent.[16]

Failure after failure, an universal crash, utter cessation of
extensively organized and productive labor: instead of productive
industries, I see none now but destructive industries, those of the
agricultural and commercial vermin, those of dealers in junk and
speculators who dismantle mansions and abbeys, and who demolish
chateaux and churches so as to sell the materials as cheap as dirt,
who bargain away national possessions, so as to make a profit on the
transaction.  Imagine the mischief a temporary owner, steeped in debt,
needy and urged on by the maturity of his engagements, can and must do
to an estate held under a precarious title and of suspicious
acquirement, which he has no idea of keeping, and from which,
meanwhile, he derives every possible benefit:[17] not only does he put
no spokes in the mill-wheel, no stones in the dyke, no tiles on the
roof, but he buys no manure, exhausts the soil, devastates the forest,
alienates the fields, and dismembers the entire farm, damaging the
ground and the stock of tools and injuring the dwelling by selling its
mirrors, lead and iron, and oftentimes the window-shutters and doors.
He turns all into cash, no matter how, at the expense of the domain,
which he leaves in a run-down condition, unfurnished and for a long
time unproductive.  In like manner, the communal possessions, ravaged,
pillaged and then pieced out and divided off, are so many organisms
which are sacrificed for the immediate relief of the village poor, but
of course to the detriment of their future productiveness and an
abundant yield.[18]

Alone, amongst these millions of men who have stopped working, or work
the wrong way, the petty cultivator labors to advantage; free of
taxes, of tithes and of feudal imposts, possessing a scrap of ground
which he has obtained for almost nothing or without stretching his
purse strings, he works in good spirits.[19]  He is sure that
henceforth his crop will no longer be eaten up by the levies of the
seignior, of the décimateur and of the King, that it will belong to
him, that it will be wholly his, and that the worse the famine in the
towns, the dearer he will sell his produce.  Hence, he has ploughed
more vigorously than ever; he has even cleared waste ground; getting
the soil gratis, or nearly so, and having to make but few advances,
having no other use for his advances, consisting of seed, manure, the
work of his cattle and of his own hands, he has planted, reaped and
raised grain with the greatest energy.  Perhaps other articles of
consumption will be scarce; it may be that, owing to the ruin of other
branches of industry, it will be hard to get dry-goods, shoes, sugar,
soap, oil, candles, wine and brandy; it may happen that, owing to the
bungling way in which agricultural transformations have been effected,
all produce of the secondary order, meat, vegetables, butter and eggs,
may become scarce.  In any event, French foodstuffs par excellence is
on hand, standing in the field or stored in sheaves in the barns; in
1792 and 1793, and even in 1794, there is enough grain in France to
provide every French inhabitant with his daily bread.[20]

But that is not enough.  In order that each Frenchman may obtain his
bit of bread every day, it is still essential that grain should reach
the markets in sufficient quantities, and that the bakers should every
day have enough flour to make all the bread that is required;
moreover, the bread offered for sale in the bakeries should not exceed
the price which the majority of consumers can afford to pay.  Now, in
fact, through a forced result of the new system, neither of these
conditions is fulfilled.  - In the first place, wheat, and hence
bread, is too dear.  Even at the old rate, these would still be too
dear for the innumerable empty or half-empty purses, after so many
attacks on property, industry and trade, now that so many hundreds of
workmen and employees are out of work, now that so many land-owners
and bourgeois receive no rents, now that incomes, profits, wages and
salaries have diminished by hundreds of thousands.  But wheat, and,
consequently, bread, has not remained at old rates.  Formerly a sack
of wheat in Paris was worth 50 francs.  In February, 1793, it is worth
sixty-five francs; in May, 1793, one hundred francs and then one
hundred and fifty; and hence bread, in Paris, early in 1793, instead
of being three sous the pound, costs six sous, in many of the southern
departments seven and eight sous, and in other places ten and twelve
sous.[21] The reason is, that, since August 10, 1792, after the King's
fall and the wrenching away of the ancient keystone of the arch which
still kept the loosened stones of the social edifice in place, the
frightened peasant would no longer part with his produce; he
determined not to take assignats, not to let his grain go for anything
but ringing coin.  To exchange good wheat for bad, dirty paper rags
seemed to him a trick, and justly so, for, on going to town every
month he found that the dealers gave him less merchandise for these
rags.  Being distrustful and a hoarder, he must have good, old
fashioned crowns, with the ancient effigy, so as to lay them away in a
jar or old woollen stocking; give him specie or he will keep his
grain.  For he is not, as formerly, obliged to part with it as soon as
it is cut, to pay taxes and rent; the bailiff and sheriff are no
longer there to constrain him; in these times of disorder and
demagoguism, under impotent or partial authorities, neither the public
nor the private creditor has the power to compel payment, while the
spurs which formerly impelled the farmer to seek the nearest market
are blunted or broken.  He therefore stays away, and he has excellent
reasons for so doing.  Vagabonds and the needy stand by the roadside
and at the entrances of the towns to stop and pillage the loaded
carts; in the markets and on the open square, women cut open bags of
grain with their scissors and empty them, or the municipality, forced
to do it by the crowd, fixes the price at a reduced rate.[22] - The
larger a town, the greater the difficulty in supplying its market; for
its provisions are drawn from a distance; each department, each
canton, each village keeps its own grain for itself by means of legal
requisitions or by brutal force; it is impossible for wholesale
dealers in grain to make bargains; they are styled monopolists, and
the mob, breaking into their storehouses, hangs them out of
preference.[23]  As the government, accordingly, has proclaimed their
speculations "crimes," it is going to interdict their trade and
substitute itself for them.[24] - But this substitution only increases
the penury still more; in vain do the towns force collections, tax
their rich men, raise money on loan, and burden themselves beyond
their resources;[25] they only make the matter worse.  When the
municipality of Paris expends twelve thousand francs a day for the
sale of flour at a low price in the markets, it keeps away the flour-
dealers, who cannot deliver flour at such low figures; the result is
that there is not flour enough in the market for the six hundred
thousand mouths in Paris; when it expends seventy-five thousand francs
daily to indemnify the bakers, it attracts the outside population,
which rushes into Paris to get bread cheap, and for the seven hundred
thousand mouths of Paris and the suburbs combined, the bakers have not
an adequate supply.  Whoever comes late finds the shop empty;
consequently, everybody tries to get there earlier and earlier, at
dawn, before daybreak, and then five or six hours before daybreak.  in
February, 1793, long lines of people are already waiting at the
bakers' door, these lines growing longer and longer in April, while in
June they are enormously long.[26]  Naturally, for lack of bread,
people fall back on other aliments, which also grow dearer; add to
this the various contrivances and effects of Jacobin politics which
still further increase the dearness of food of all sorts, and also of
every other necessary article: for instance, the extremely bad
condition of the roads, which renders transportation slower and more
costly; the prohibition of the export of coin and hence the obtaining
of food from abroad; the decree which obliges each industrial or
commercial association, at present or to come, to " pay annually into
the national treasury one-quarter of the amount of its dividends;" the
revolt in Vendée, which deprives Paris of six hundred oxen a week; the
feeding of the armies, which takes one-half of the cattle brought to
the Poissy market; shutting off the sea and the continent, which ruins
manufacturers and extensive commercial operations; the insurrections
in Bordeaux, Marseilles and the South, which still further raise the
price of groceries, sugar, soap, oil, candles, wine and brandy.[27] -
Early in 1793, a pound of beef in France is worth on the average,
instead of six sous twenty sous; in May, at Paris, brandy which, six
months before, cost thirty-five sous, costs ninety-four sous; in July,
a pound of veal, instead of five sous, costs twenty-two sous.  Sugar,
from twenty sous, advances to four francs ten sous; a candle costs
seven sous.  France, pushed on by the Jacobins, approaches the depths
of misery, entering the first circle of its Inferno; other circles
follow down deeper and deeper, narrower still and yet more somber;
under Jacobin impulsion is she to descend to the lowest?



III.  Privation.

First and general cause of privations.  - The socialist principle of
the Revolutionary government.  - Measures against large as well as
small properties.  - Expropriation of all remaining corporations,
enormous issues of paper-money.  forced rates of its circulation,
forced loans, requisitions of coin and plate, revolutionary taxes,
suppression of special organs of labor on a large scale.  - New
measures against small proprietorship.  - The Maximum, requisitions
for food and labor.  - Situation of the shop-keeper, cultivator and
laborer.  - Effect of the measures on labor on a small scale.
Stoppage of sales.

Obviously, if the people is not being fed properly and in places not
at all, it is because one of the central and most important fibers of
the economical machine has been incapacitated.  It is evident that
this fiber controls the sentiment by which man holds on to his
property, fears to risk it, refuses to depreciate it, and tries to
increase it.[28] Obviously in the real human being, such as he
actually is made up, this intense sentiment, tenacious, always
stirring and active, is the magazine of inward energy which provides
for three-fourths, almost the whole, of that unremitting effort, that
calculating attention, that determined perseverance which leads the
individual to undergo privation, to contrive and to exert himself, to
turn to profitable account the labor of his hands, brain and capital,
and to produce, save and create for himself and for others various
resources and comforts.

(It is probable that disinterested motives, pure love for one's
neighbor, for humanity, for country, do not form a hundredth part of
the total energy that produces human activity.  It must not be
forgotten that the actions of men are alloyed with motives of a lower
order, such as love of fame, the desire of self-admiration and of
self-approval, fear of punishment and hope of reward beyond the grave,
all of these being interested motives, and without which disinterested
motives would be inoperative excepting in two or three souls among ten
thousand.[29])

Thus far, in society as a whole, this sentiment has been only
partially touched, and the injury has mainly been to the well-to-do or
rich classes.  At first only one-half of its useful energy has been
destroyed since only those services rendered by the rich and wealthy
classes have been dispensed with.  Little else than the labor of the
capitalist, proprietor or contractor has been suppressed, whose far-
reaching, combined, comprehensive labor, the rewards of which consist
of objects of luxury and convenience, ensure for society that abundant
supplies are always on hand, through ready and spontaneous
distribution of indispensable commodities.  There remains (for the
Jacobins) to crush out what is left of this laborious and nutritive
fiber; the remnant of useful energy has to be destroyed down to its
extirpation among the people.  Here there must be a suppression, as
far as possible, of all manual, rude labor even on a small scale, and
of its rudimentary fruits; the discouragement of the insignificant
shopkeeper, mechanic and ploughman must be effected; the corner-grocer
must be prevented from selling his sugar and candles, and the cobbler
from mending shoes: the miller must think of giving up his mill and
the wagoner of abandoning his cart; the farmer must be convinced that
the best thing he can do is to get rid of his horses, eat his pork
himself,[30] let his oxen famish and leave his crops to rot on the
ground.  - The Jacobins are to do all this, for it is the inevitable
result of the theory that they have proclaimed and which they apply.
According to this theory the stern, strong, deep-seated instinct
through which the individual stubbornly holds on to what he has, to
what he makes for himself and for those that belong to him, is just
the unwholesome fiber that must be rooted out or paralyzed at any
cost; its true name is "egoism, incivism," and its operations consist
of outrages on the community, which is the sole legitimate proprietor
of property and products, and, yet more, of all persons and services.
Body and soul, all belongs to the State, nothing to individuals, and,
if need be, the State has the right to take not only lands and
capital, but, again, to claim and tax at whatever rate it pleases all
corn and cattle, all vehicles and the animals that draw them, all
candles and sugar; it has the right to appropriate to itself and tax
at whatever rate it pleases, the labor of shoemaker, tailor, miller,
wagoner, ploughman, reaper and thrasher.  The seizure of men and
things is universal, and the new sovereigns do their best at it; for,
in practice, necessity urges them on; insurrection thunders at their
door; their supporters, all crackbrains with empty stomachs, the poor
and the idle, and the Parisian populace, listen to no reason and
blindly insist on things haphazard; they are bound to satisfy their
patrons at once, to issue one on top of the other all the decrees they
call for, even when impracticable and mischievous to starve the
provinces so as to feed the city, to starve the former to-morrow so as
to feed the latter to-day.  - Subject to the clamors and menaces of
the street they dispatch things rapidly; they cease to care for the
future, the present being all that concerns them; they take and take
forcibly; they uphold violence by brutality, they support robbery with
murder; they expropriate persons by categories and appropriate objects
by categories, and after the rich they despoil the poor.  - During
fourteen months the revolutionary government thus keeps both hands at
work, one hand completing the confiscation of property, large and
medium, and the other proceeding to the entire abolition of property
even on a small scale.

Against large or medium properties it suffices to extend and aggravate
the decrees already passed.  - The spoliation of the last of existing
corporations must be effected: the government, confiscates the
property of hospitals, communes, and all scientific or literary
associations.[31]

To this we must add the spoliation of State credits and all other
credits: it issues in fourteen months 5 100 millions of assignats, at
one time and with one decree 1,400 million and another time 2,000
millions.  It thus condemns itself to complete future bankruptcy.  It
also calls in the 1,500 million of assignats bearing the royal stamp
(à face royale) and thus arbitrarily converts and reduces the public
debt on the Grand Ledger, which is already, in fact, a partial and
declared bankruptcy.  Six months imprisonment for whoever refuses to
accept assignats at par, twenty years in irons if the offence is
repeated and the guillotine if there is an incivique intention or act,
which suffices for all other creditors.[32]

The spoliation of individuals, a forced loan of a billion on the rich,
requisitions for coin against assignats at par, seizures of plate and
jewels in private houses, revolutionary taxes so numerous as not only
to exhaust the capital, but likewise the credit, of the person
taxed,[33] and the resumption by the State of the public domain
pledged to private individuals for the past three centuries.  How many
years of labor are requisite to bring together again so much available
capital, to reconstruct in France and to refill once again those
private reservoirs which are to contain the accumulated savings
essential for the out-flow required to drive the great wheel of each
general enterprise? Take into account, moreover, the enterprises which
are directly destroyed, root and branch, by revolutionary executions,
enforced against the manufacturers and traders of Lyons, Marseilles
and Bordeaux, proscribed in a mass,[34] guillotined, imprisoned, or
put to flight, their factories stopped, their storehouses put under
sequestration, with their stocks of brandy, soap, silk, muslins,
leather, paper, serges, cloth, canvas, cordage and the rest; the same
at Nantes under Carrier, at Strasbourg under Saint-Just, and
everywhere else.[35] - "Commerce is annihilated," writes a Swiss
merchant,[36] from Paris, and the government, one would say, tries
systematically to render it impossible.  On the 27th of June, 1793,
the Convention closes the Bourse; on the 15th of April, 1794, it
suppresses "financial associations" and "prohibits all bankers,
merchants and other persons from organizing any establishment of the
said character under any pretext or title whatsoever." On the 8th of
September, 1793, the Commune places seals "in all the counting-houses
of bankers, stockbrokers, agents and silver-dealers,"[37] and locks up
their owners; as a favor, considering that they are obliged to pay the
drafts drawn on them, they are let out, but provisionally, and on
condition that they remain under arrest at home, "under the guard of
two good citizens," at their own expense.  Such is the case in Paris
and in other cities, not alone with prominent merchants, but likewise
with notaries and lawyers, with whom funds are on deposit and who
manage estates; a sans-culotte with his pike stands in their cabinet
whilst they write, and he accompanies them in the street when they
call on their clients.  Imagine the state of a notary's office or a
counting-room under a system of this sort! The master of it winds up
his business as soon as he can, no matter how, makes no new
engagements and does as little as possible.  Still more inactive than
he, his colleagues, condemned to an indefinite listlessness, under
lock and key in the common prison, no longer attend to their business.
- There is a general, total paralysis of those natural organs which,
in economic life, produce, elaborate, receive, store, preserve,
exchange and transmit in large quantities; and as an after effect,
embarrass, saturate, or weaken all the lesser subordinate organs to
which the superior ones no longer provide outlets, intermediary
agencies or aliment.

It is now the turn of the small enterprises.  Whatever their
sufferings may be they are ordered to carry their work out as in
normal times, and they will be forced to do this.  The Convention,
pursuing its accustomed rigid logical course with its usual
shortsightedness, lays on them its violent and inept hands; they are
trodden down, trampled upon and mauled for the purpose of curing them.
Farmers are forbidden to sell their produce except in the markets, and
obliged to bring to these a quota of so many sacks per week, military
raids compelling them to furnish their quotas.[38] Shopkeepers are
ordered "to expose for sale, daily and publicly, all goods and
provisions of prime necessity" that they have on hand, while a maximum
price is established, above which no one shall sell "bread, flour and
grain, vegetables and fruits, wine, vinegar, cider, beer and brandy,
fresh meat, salt meat, pork, cattle, dried, salted, smoked or pickled
fish, butter, honey, sugar, sweet-oil, lamp-oil, candles, firewood,
charcoal and other coal, salt, soap, soda, potash, leather, iron,
steel, castings, lead, brass, hemp, linen, woolens, canvas and woven
stuffs, sabots, shoes and tobacco." Whoever keeps on hand more than he
consumes is a monopolist and commits a capital crime; the penalty,
very severe, is imprisonment or the pillory, for whoever sells above
the established price:[39] such are the simple and direct expedients
of the revolutionary government, and such is the character of its
inventive faculty, like that of the savage who hews down a tree to get
at its fruit.  - Consequently, after the first application of the
"maximum" the shopkeeper is no longer able to carry on business; his
customers, attracted by the sudden depreciation in price of his wares,
flock to his shop and empty it in a few days;[40] having sold his
goods for half what they cost him,[41] he has got back only one-half
of his advances; therefore, he can only one-half renew his assortment,
less than a half, since he has not paid his bills, and his credit is
declining, the (Jacobin) representatives on mission having taken all
his coin, plate and assignats.  Hence, during the following month,
buyers find on his unfurnished counters nothing but rubbish and
refuse.

In like manner, after the proclamation of the maximum,[42] the peasant
refuses to bring his produce to market, while the revolutionary army
is not everywhere on hand to take it from him by force: he leaves his
crop unthrashed as long as he can, and complains of not finding the
men to thrash it.  If necessary, he hides it or feeds it out to his
animals.  He often barters it away for wood, for a side of bacon or in
payment for a day's work.  At night, he carts it off six leagues to a
neighboring district, where the local maximum is fixed at a higher
rate.  He knows who, in his own vicinity, still has specie in his
pocket and he underhandedly supplies him with his stores.  He
especially conceals his superabundance and, as formerly, pretends to
be poor and suffering.  He is on good terms with the village
authorities, with the mayor and national agent who are as interested
as he is in evading the law, and, on a bribe being necessary, he gives
it.  At last, he allows himself to be sued, and his property attached;
he goes to prison and tires the authorities out with his obstinacy.
Hence, from week to week, less flour and grain and fewer cattle come
to market, while meat becomes scarcer at the butcher's, and bread at
the baker's.  - Having thus paralyzed the lesser organs of supply and
demand the Jacobins now have only to paralyze labor itself, the
skilled hands, the active and vigorous arms.  This is simply done by
replacing the independent private workshop by the compulsory national
workshop in this way replacing piece-work by work by the day, and the
attentive, energetic workman who minds his business and expects to
earn money in return by inattentive apathic workmen pressed into a
poorly paid service but paid even when they botch the job or laze
about.  - This is what the Jacobins do by forcibly commanding the
services of all sorts of laborers,[43] "all who help handle, transport
and retail produce and articles of prime necessity," "country people
who usually get in the crops," and, more particularly, thrashers,
reapers, carters, rafts men, and also shoemakers, tailors, blacksmiths
and the rest.  - At every point of the social organism, the same
principle is applied with the same result.  Substitute everywhere an
external, artificial and mechanical constraint for the inward, natural
and animating stimulant, and you get nothing but an universal atrophy.
Deprive people of the fruits of their labor, and yet more, force them
to produce by fear, confiscate their time, their painstaking efforts
and their persons, reduce them to the condition of fellahs, create in
them the sentiments of fellahs, and you will have nothing but the
labor and productions of fellahs, that is to say, a minimum of labor
and production, and hence, insufficient supplies for sustaining a very
dense population, which, multiplied through a superior and more
productive civilization, will not long subsist under a barbarous,
inferior and unproductive régime.  When this systematic and complete
expropriation terminates we see the final result of the system, no
longer a dearth, but famine, famine on a large scale, and the
destruction of lives by millions.  - Among the Jacobins,[44] some of
the maddest who are clear-sighted, on account of their fury, Guffroy,
Antonelle, Jean Bon Saint-André, Collot d'Herbois, foresee the
consequences and accept them along with the principle.  Others, who
avoid seeing it, are only the more determined in the application of
it.  However, they all work together with all their might to aggravate
the misery of which the lamentable spectacle is so vainly exposed
under their eyes.



IV.  Hunger.

Famine.  - In the provinces.  - At Paris.  - People standing in lines
under the Revolutionary government to obtain food.  - Its quality.  -
Distress and chagrin.

Collot d'Herbois wrote from Lyons on November 6, 1793: "There is not
two days' supply of provisions here." On the following day: "The
present population of Lyons is one hundred and thirty thousand souls
at least, and there is not sufficient subsistence for three days."
Again the day after: "Our situation in relation to food is
deplorable." Then, the next day: "Famine is beginning."[45] - Near by,
in the Montbrison district, in February, 1794, "there is no food or
provisions left for the people;" all has been taken by requisition and
carried off, even seed for planting, so that the fields lie
fallow.[46] - At Marseilles, "since the maximum, everything is
lacking; even the fishermen no longer go out (on the sea) so that
there is no supply of fish to live on."[47] - At Cahors, in spite of
multiplied requisitions, the Directory of Lot and Representative
Taillefer[48] state that "the inhabitants, for more than eight days,
are reduced wholly to maslin bread composed of one-fifth of wheat and
the rest of barley, barley-malt and millet." - At Nîmes,[49] to make
the grain supply last, which is giving out, the bakers and all private
persons are ordered not to sift the meal, but to leave the bran in it
and knead and bake the "dough such as it is." - At Grenoble,[50] "the
bakers have stopped baking; the country people no longer bring wheat
in; the dealers hide away their goods, or put them in the hands of
neighborly officials, or send them off." - " It goes from bad to
worse," write the agents of Huningue;[51]  one might say even, that
they would give this or that article to their cattle rather than sell
it in conformity with the tax." - The inhabitants of towns are
everywhere put on rations, and so small a ration as to scarcely keep
them from dying with hunger.  "Since my arrival in Tarbes," writes
another agent,[52] "every person is limited to half a pound of bread a
day, composed one-third of wheat and two-thirds of corn meal." The
next day after the fête in honor of the tyrant's death there was
absolutely none at all.  "A half-pound of bread is also allowed at
Evreux,[53] "and even this is obtained with a good deal of trouble,
many being obliged to go into the country and get it from the farmers
with coin." And even "they have got very little bread, flour or wheat,
for they have been obliged to bring what they had to Evreux for the
armies and for Paris."

It is worse at Rouen and at Bordeaux: at Rouen, in Brumaire, the
inhabitants have only one quarter of a pound per head per diem of
bread; at Bordeaux, " for the past three months," says the agent,[54]
" the people sleep at the doors of the bakeries, to pay high for bread
which they often do not get .  .  .  There has been no baking done to-
day, and to-morrow only half a loaf will be given to each person.
This bread is made of oats and beans .  .  .  On days that there is
none, beans, chestnuts and rice are distributed in very small
quantities," four ounces of bread, five of rice or chestnuts.  "I, who
tell you this, have already eaten eight or ten meals without bread; I
would gladly do without it if I could get potatoes in place of it, but
these, too, cannot be had." Five months later, fasting still
continues, and it lasts until after the reign of Terror, not alone in
the town, but throughout the department.  "In the district of
Cadillac, says Tallien,[55] "absolute dearth prevails; the citizens of
the rural districts contend with each other for the grass in the
fields; I have eaten bread made of dog-grass." Haggard and worn out,
the peasant, with his pallid wife and children, resorts to the marsh
to dig roots, while there is scarcely enough strength in his arms to
hold the plough.  - The same spectacle is visible in places which
produce but little grain, or where the granaries have been emptied by
the revolutionary drafts.  "In many of the Indre districts," writes
the representative on missions,[56] "food is wanting absolutely.  Even
in some of the communes, many of the inhabitants are reduced to a
frightful state of want, feeding on acorns, bran and other unhealthy
food.  .  .  .  The districts of Châtre and Argenton, especially, will
be reduced to starvation unless they are promptly relieved.  .  .  .
The cultivation of the ground is abandoned; most of the persons in the
jurisdiction wander about the neighboring departments in search of
food." - And it is doubtful whether they find it.  In the department
of Cher, "the butchers can no longer slaughter; the dealers' stores
are all empty." In Allier, "the slaughterhouses and markets are
deserted, every species of vegetable and aliment having disappeared;
the inns are closed." In one of the Lozère districts, composed of five
cantons, of which one produces an extra quantity of rye, the people
live on requisitions imposed on Gard and the Upper Loire; the
extortions of the representatives in these two departments "were
distributed among the municipalities, and by these to the most
indigent: many entire families, many of the poor and even of the rich,
suffered for want of bread during six or eight days, and this
frequently."[57] Nevertheless they do not riot; they merely supplicate
and stretch forth their hands "with tears in their eyes.  " - Such is
the diet and submission of the stomach in the provinces.   Paris is
less patient.  For this reason, all the rest is sacrificed to it,[58]
not merely the public funds, the Treasury from which it gets one or
two millions per week,[59] but whole districts are starved for its
benefit, six departments providing grain, twenty six departments
providing pork,[60] at the rate of the maximum, through requisitions,
through the prospect of imprisonment and of the scaffold in case of
refusal or concealment, under the predatory bayonets of the
revolutionary army.  The capital, above all, has to be fed.  Let us
see, under this system of partiality, how people live in Paris and
what they feed on.

"Frightful crowds" at the doors of the bakeries, then at the doors of
the butchers and grocers, then at the markets for butter, eggs, fish
and vegetables, and then on the quay for wine, firewood and charcoal -
such is the steady refrain of the police reports.[61] - And this lasts
uninterruptedly during the fourteen months of revolutionary
government: long lines of people waiting in turn for bread, meat, oil,
soap and candles, "queues for milk, for butter, for wood, for
charcoal, queues everywhere! "[62] "There was one queue beginning at
the door of a grocery in the Petit Carreau stretching half way up the
rue Montorgueil."[63] These queues form at three o'clock in the
morning, one o'clock and at midnight, increasing from hour to hour.
Picture to yourself, reader, the file of wretched men and women
sleeping on the pavement when the weather is fine[64] and when not
fine, standing up on stiff tottering legs; above all)in winter, "the
rain pouring on their backs," and their feet in the snow, for so many
weary hours in dark, foul, dimly lighted streets strewed with garbage;
for, for want of oil, one half of the street lamps are extinguished,
and for lack of money, there is no repaving, no more sweeping, the
offal being piled up against the walls.[65]  The crowd draggles along
through it, likewise, nasty, tattered and torn, people with shoes full
of holes, because the shoemakers do no more work for their customers,
and in dirty shirts, because no more soap can be had to wash with,
while, morally as well as physically, all these forlorn beings
elbowing each other render themselves still fouler.  -
Promiscuousness, contact, weariness, waiting and darkness afford free
play to the grosser instincts; especially in summer, natural
bestiality and Parisian mischievousness have full play.  "Lewd
women"[66] pursue their calling standing in the row; it is an
interlude for them; "their provoking expressions, their immoderate
laughter," is heard some distance off and they find it a convenient
place: two steps aside, on the flank of the row, are "half open doors
and dark alleys" which invite tête-à-tête; many of these women who
have brought their mattresses "sleep there and commit untold
abominations." What an example for the wives and daughters of steady
workmen, for honest servants who hear and see! "Men stop at each row
and choose their dulcinea, while others, less shameless, pounce on the
women like bulls and kiss them one after the other." Are not these the
fraternal kisses of patriotic Jacobins? Do not Mayor Pache's wife and
daughter go to the clubs and kiss drunken sans-culottes? And what says
the guard? - It has enough to do to restrain another blind and deaf
animal instinct, aroused as it is by suffering, anticipation and
deception.

On approaching each butcher's stall before it opens "the porters,
bending under the weight of a side of beef, quicken their steps so as
not to be assailed by the crowd which presses against them, seeming to
devour the raw meat with their eyes." They force a passage, enter the
shop in the rear, and it seems as if the time for distributing the
meat had come; the gendarmes, spurring their horses to a gallop,
scatter the groups that are too dense; "rascals, in pay of the
Commune," range the women in files, two and two, "shivering" in the
cold morning air of December and January, awaiting their turn.
Beforehand, however, the butcher, according to law, sets aside the
portion for the hospitals, for pregnant women and others who are
confined, for nurses, and besides, notwithstanding the law, he sets
aside another portion for the revolutionary committee of the section,
for the assistant commissioner and superintendent, for the pashas and
semi pashas of the quarter, and finally for his rich customers who pay
him extra.[67]  To this end, "porters with broad shoulders form an
impenetrable rampart in front of the shop and carry away whole oxen;"
after this is over, the women find the shop stripped, while many,
after wasting their time for four mortal hours," go away empty handed.
- With this prospect before them the daily assemblages get to be
uneasy and the waves rise; nobody, except those at the head of the
row, is sure of his pittance those that are behind regard enviously
and with suppressed anger the person ahead of them.  First come
outcries, then jeering and then scuffling; the women rival the men in
struggling and in profanity,[68] and they hustle each other.  The line
suddenly breaks; each rushes to get ahead of the other; the foremost
place belongs to the most robust and the most brutal, and to secure it
they have to trample down their neighbors.

There are fisticuffs every day.   When an assemblage remains quiet the
spectators take notice of it.  In general "they fight,[69] snatch
bread out of each other's hands; those who cannot get any forcing
whoever gets a loaf weighing four pounds to share it in small pieces.
The women yell frightfully.  .  .  .  Children sent by their parents
are beaten," while the weak are pitched into the gutter.  "In
distributing the meanest portions of food[70] it is force which
decides," the strength of loins and arms; "a number of women this
morning came near losing their lives in trying to get four ounces of
butter.  - More sensitive and more violent than men, "they do not, or
will not, listen to reason,[71] they pounce down like harpies" on the
market wagons; they thrash the drivers, strew the vegetables and
butter on the ground, tumble over each other and are suffocated
through the impetuosity of the assault; some, "trampled upon, almost
crushed, are carried off half dead." Everybody for himself.  Empty
stomachs feel that, to get anything, it is important to get ahead, not
to await for the distribution, the unloading or even the arrival of
the supplies.  - "A boat laden with wine having been signaled, the
crowd rushed on board to pillage it and the boat sunk," probably along
with a good many of its invaders.[72]  Other gatherings at the
barriers stop the peasants' wagons and take their produce before they
reach the markets.  Outside the barriers, children and women throw
stones at the milkmen, forcing them to get down from their carts and
distribute milk on the spot.  Still further out, one or two leagues
off on the highways, gangs from Paris go at night to intercept and
seize the supplies intended for Paris.  "This morning," says a
watchman, "all the Faubourg St.  Antoine scattered itself along the
Vincennes road and pillaged whatever was on the way to the city; some
paid, while others carried off without paying.  .  .  .  The
unfortunate peasants swore that they would not fetch anything more,"
the dearth thus increasing through the efforts to escape it.

In vain the government makes its requisitions for Paris as if in a
state of siege, and fixes the quantity of grain on paper which each
department, district, canton, and commune, must send to the capital.
- Naturally, each department, district, canton and commune strives to
retain its own supplies, for charity begins at home.[73] Especially in
a village, the mayor and members of a municipality, themselves
cultivators, are lukewarm when the commune is to be starved for the
benefit of the capital.  They declare a less return of grain than
there really is; they allege reasons and pretexts.  They mystify or
suborn the commissioner on provisions, who is a stranger, incompetent
and needy; they make him drink and eat, and, now and then, fill his
pocket book.  He slips over the accounts, he gives the village
receipts on furnishing three-quarters or a half of the demand, often
in spoilt or mixed grain or poor flour, while those who have no rusty
wheat get it of their neighbors.  Instead of parting with a hundred
quintals they part with fifty, while the quantity of grain in the
Paris markets is not only insufficient, but the grain blackens or
sprouts and the flour grows musty.  In vain the government makes
clerks and depositaries of butchers and grocers, allowing them five or
ten per cent.  profit on retail sales of the food it supplies them
with at wholesale, and thus creates in Paris, at the expense of all
France, an artificial drop in prices.  Naturally, the bread[74] which,
thanks to the State, costs three sous in Paris, is furtively carried
out of Paris into the suburbs, where six sous are obtained for it.
There is the same furtive leakage for other food furnished by the
State on the same conditions to other dealers; the tax is a burden
which forces them to go outside their shops.  Food finds its level
like water, not alone outside of Paris, but in Paris itself.

* Naturally, "the grocers peddle their goods" secretly, "sugar,
candles, soap, butter, dried vegetables, meat pies and the rest,"
amongst private houses, in which these articles are bought at any
price.

* Naturally, the butcher keeps his large pieces of beef and choice
morsels for the large eating houses, and for rich customers who pay
him whatever profit he asks.

* Naturally, whoever is in authority, or has the power, uses it to
supply himself first, largely, and in preference; we have seen the
levies of the revolutionary committees, superintendents and agents; as
soon as rations are allotted to all mouths, each potentate will have
several rations delivered for his mouth alone; in the meantime[75] the
patriots who guard the barriers appropriate all provisions that
arrive, and the next morning, should any scolding appear in the orders
of the day, it is but slight.

Such are the two results of the system: not only is the food which is
supplied to Paris scant and poor, but the regular consumers of it,
those who take their turn to get it, obtain but a small portion, and
that the worst.[76] A certain inspector, on going to the corn market
for a sample of flour, writes "that it cannot be called flour;[77] it
is ground bran," and not a nutritive substance; the bakers are forced
to take it, the markets containing for the most part no other supply
than this flour." - Again, three weeks later, "Food is still very
scarce and poor in quality.  The bread is disagreeable to the taste
and produces maladies with which many citizens are suffering, like
dysentery and other inflammatory ailments." The same report, three
months later during the month of Nivôse: "Complaints are constantly
made of the poor quality of flour, which, it is said, makes a good
many people ill ; it causes severe pain in the intestines, accompanied
with a slow fever.  - During Ventôse, "the scarcity of every article
is extremely great,"[78] especially of meat.  Some women in the Place
Maubert, pass six hours in a line waiting for it, and do not get the
quarter of a pound; in many stalls there is none at all, not "an
ounce" being obtainable to make broth for the sick.  Workmen do not
get it in their shops and do without their soup; they live on "bread
and salted herrings." A great many people groan over "not having eaten
bread for a fortnight;" women say that "they have not had a dish of
meat and vegetables (pot au feu) for a month." Meanwhile "vegetables
are astonishingly scarce and excessively dear.  .  .  .  two sous for
a miserable carrot, and as much for two small leeks." Out of two
thousand women who wait at the central market for a distribution of
beans, only six hundred receive any.  Potatoes increase in price in
one week from two to three francs a bushel, and oatmeal and ground
peas triple in price.  "The grocers have no more brown sugar, even for
the sick," and sell candles and soap only by the half pound.  - A
fortnight later candles are wholly wanting in certain quarters, except
in the section storehouse, which is almost empty, each person being
allowed only one.  A good many households go to rest at sundown for
lack of lights and do not cook any dinner for lack of coal.  Eggs,
especially, are "honored as invisible divinities," while the absent
butter "is a god."[79] "If this lasts," say the workmen, "we shall
have to cut each other's throats, since there is nothing left to live
on."[80] "Sick women,[81] children in their cradles, lie outstretched
in the sun," in the very heart of Paris, in rue Vivienne, on the Pont-
Royal, and remain there "late in the night, demanding alms of the
passers-by." "One is constantly stopped by beggars of both sexes, most
of them healthy and strong," begging, they say, for lack of work.
Without counting the feeble and the infirm who are unable to stand in
a line, whose sufferings are visible, who gradually waste away and die
without a murmur at home, "one encounters in the streets and markets"
only famished and eager visages, "an immense crowd of citizens running
and dashing against each other," crying out and weeping, "everywhere
presenting an image of despair."[82]



V.  Revolutionary Remedies.

Revolutionary remedies.  - Rigor against the refractory.  - Decrees
and orders rendering the State the only depositary and distributor of
food.  - Efforts made to establish a conscription of labor.  -
Discouragement of the Peasant.  - He refuses to cultivate.  - Decrees
and orders compelling him to harvest.  - His stubbornness.  -
Cultivators imprisoned by thousands.  - The Convention is obliged to
set them at liberty.  - Fortunate circumstances which save France from
extreme famine.

This penury only exists, say the Jacobins, because the laws against
monopoly, and sales above the "maximum" prices are not being obeyed to
the letter of the law.  The egoism of the cultivator and the cupidity
of dealers are not restrained by fear and delinquents escape too
frequently from the legal penalty.  Let us enforce this penalty
rigorously; let us increase the punishment against them and their
instruments; let us screw up the machine and give them a new wrench.
A new estimate and verification of the food supply takes place,
domiciliary searches, seizures of special stores regarded as too
ample,[83] limited rations for each consumer, a common and obligatory
mess table for all prisoners, brown, égalité bread, mostly of bran,
for every mouth that can chew, prohibition of the making of any other
kind, confiscation of boulters and sieves,[84] the "individual,"
personal responsibility of every administrator who allows the people
he directs to resist or escape providing the demanded supplies, the
sequestration of his property, imprisonment, fines, the pillory and
the guillotine to hurry up requisitions, or stop free trading, - every
terrifying method is driven to the utmost against the farmers and
cultivators of the soil.

After April, 1794,[85] crowds of this class are found filling the
prisons to overflowing; the Revolution has struck them also.  They
stroll about in the court yard, and wander through the corridors with
a sad, stupefied expression, no longer comprehending the way things
are going on in the world.  In vain are efforts made to explain to
them that "their crops are national property and that they are simply
its depositaries;"[86] never had this new principle entered into, nor
will it enter, their rude brains; always, through habit and instinct,
will they work against it.  - Let them be spared the temptation.  Let
us (the Jacobins) relieve them from, and, in fact, take their crops;
let the State in France become the sole depositary and distributor of
grain; let it solely buy and sell grain at a fixed rate.
Consequently, at Paris,[87] the Committee of Public Safety first puts
"in requisition all the oats that can be found in the Republic; every
holder of oats is required to deposit his stock on hand within eight
days, in the storehouse indicated by the district administration " at
the maximum " price; otherwise he is " a 'suspect' and must be
punished as such." In the meantime, through still more comprehensive
orders issued in the provinces, Paganel in the department of Tarn, and
Dartigoyte in those of Gers and the Upper-Garonne,[88] enjoin each
commune to establish public granaries.  "All citizens are ordered to
bring in whatever produce they possess in grain, flour, wheat, maslin,
rye, barley, oats, millet, buckwheat" at the "maximum" rate.  Nobody
shall keep on hand more than one month's supply, fifty pounds of flour
or wheat for each person; in this way, the State, which holds in its
hands the keys of the storehouses, may "carry out the salutary
equalization of provisions" between department and department,
district and district, commune and commune, individual and individual.
A storekeeper will look after each of these well filled granaries; the
municipality will itself deliver rations and, moreover, "take suitable
steps to see that beans and vegetables, as they mature, be
economically distributed under its supervision," at so much per head,
and always at the rate of the "maximum." Otherwise, dismissal,
imprisonment and prosecution "in the extraordinary criminal tribunal.
"-This being accomplished, and the fruits of labor duly allotted,
there remains only the allotment of labor itself.  To effect this,
Maignet,[89] in Vaucluse, and in the Bouches du Rhône, prescribes for
each municipality the immediate formation of two lists, one of day
laborers and the other of proprietors.  "All proprietors in need of a
cultivator by the day," are to appear and ask for one at the
municipality, which will assign the applicant as many as he wants, "in
order on the list," with a card for himself and numbers for the
designated parties.  The laborer who does not enter his name on the
list, or who exacts more than the "maximum " wages, is to be sentenced
to the pillory with two years in irons.  The same sentence with the
addition of a fine of three hundred livres, is for every proprietor
who employs any laborer not on the list or who pays more than the
"maximum rate of wages.

After this, nothing more is necessary, in practice, than to

* draw up and keep in sight the new registries of names and figures
made by the members of thirty thousand municipal boards, who cannot
keep accounts and who scarcely know how to read and write;

* build a vast public granary, or put in requisition three or four
barns in each commune, in which half dried and mixed grain may rot;

* pay two hundred thousand incorruptible storekeepers and measurers
who will not divert anything from the depots for their friends or
themselves;

* add to the thirty five thousand employees of the Committee on
Provisions,[90] five hundred thousand municipal scribes disposed to
quit their trades or ploughs for the purpose of making daily
distributions gratuitously; but more precisely, to maintain four or
five millions of perfect gendarmes, one in each family, living with
it, to help along the purchases, sales and transactions of each day
and to verify at night the contents of the locker.

In short, to set one half of the French people as spies on the other
half.  - These are the conditions which secure the production and
distribution of food, and which suffice for the institution throughout
France of a conscription of labor and the captivity of grain.

Unfortunately, the peasant does not understand this theory, but he
understands business; he makes close calculations, and the positive,
patent, vulgar facts on which he reasons lead to other
conclusions:[91]

"In Messidor last they took all my last years' oats, at fourteen
francs in assignats, and, in Thermidor, they are going to take all
this year's oats, at eleven francs in assignats.  At this rate I shall
not sow at all.  Besides, I do not need any for myself, as they have
taken my horses for the army wagons.  To raise rye and wheat, as much
of it as formerly, is also working at a loss; I will raise no more
than the little I want for myself, and again, I suppose that this will
be put in requisition, even my supplies for the year! I had rather let
my fields lie fallow.  Just see now, they are taking all the live
three months' pigs! Luckily, I killed mine be forehand and it is now
in the pork barrel.  But they are going to claim all salt provisions
like the rest.  The new grabbers are worse than the old ones.  Six
months more, and we shall all die of hunger.  It is better to cross
one's arms at once and go to prison; there, at least, we shall be fed
and not have to work."

In effect, they allow themselves to be imprisoned, the best of the
small cultivators and proprietors by thousands, and Lindet,[92] at the
head of the Commission on Provisions, speaks with dismay of the ground
being no longer tilled, of cattle in France being no more abundant
than the year before, and of nothing to be had to cut this year.

For a strange thing has happened, unheard of in Europe, almost
incredible to any one familiar with the French peasant and his love of
work.  This field which he has ploughed, manured, harrowed and reaped
with his own hands, its precious crop, the crop that belongs to him
and on which he has feasted his eyes for seven months, now that it is
ripe, he will not take the trouble to gather it; it would be bothering
himself for some one else.  As the crop that he sees there is for the
government, let the government defray the final cost of getting it in;
let it do the harvesting, the reaping, the putting it in sheaves, the
carting and the thrashing in the barn.  - Thereupon, the
representatives on mission exclaim, each shouting in a louder or lower
key, according to his character.

"Many of the cultivators," writes Dartigoyte,[93] "affect a supreme
indifference for this splendid crop.  One must have seen it, as I
have, to believe how great the neglect of the wheat is in certain
parts, how it is smothered by the grass .  .  .  .  Draft, if the case
requires it, a certain number of inhabitants in this or that commune
to work in another one.  .  .  .  Every man who refuses to work,
except on the 'decade' day, must be punished as an ill-disposed
citizen, as a royalist." -

" Generous friends of nature," writes Ferry,[94] introduce amongst
you, perpetuate around you, the habit of working in common and begin
with the present crop.  Do not spare either indolent women or indolent
men, those social parasites, many of whom you doubtless have in your
midst.  What! allow lazy men and lazy women where we are! Where should
we find a Republican police? .  .  .  Immediately on the reception of
this present order the municipal officers of each commune will convoke
all citoyennes in the Temple of the Eternal and urge them, in the name
of the law, to devote themselves to the labors of harvesting.  Those
women who fail in this patriotic duty, shall be excluded from the
assemblies, from the national festivals, while all good citoyennes are
requested to repel them from their homes.  All good citizens are
requested to give to this rural festivity that sentimental character
which befits it."

- And the programme is carried out, here in idyllic shape and there
under compulsion.  Around Avignon,[95] the commanding officer, the
battalions of volunteers, and patriotic ladies, "the wives and
daughters of patriots," inscribe themselves as harvesters.  Around
Arles, "the municipality drafts all the inhabitants; patrols are sent
into the country to compel all who are engaged on other work to leave
it and do the harvesting." The Convention, on its side, orders[96] the
release, "provisionally, of all ploughmen, day-laborers, reapers, and
professional artisans and brewers, in the country and in the market
towns and communes, the population of which is not over twelve hundred
inhabitants, and who are confined as 'suspects.' " - In other terms,
physical necessity has imposed silence on the inept theory; above all
things, the crop must be harvested, and indispensable arms be restored
to the field of labor.  The governors of France are compelled to put
on the brake, if only for an instant, at the last moment, at sight of
the yawning abyss, of approaching and actual famine; France was then
gliding into it, and, if not engulfed, it is simply a miracle.

Four fortunate circumstances, at the last hour, concur to keep her
suspended on the hither brink of the precipice.  - The winter chances
to be exceptionally mild.[97] The vegetables which make up for the
absence of bread and meat provide food for April and May, while the
remarkably fine harvest, almost spontaneous, is three weeks in
advance.  - Another, and the second piece of good fortune, consists in
the great convoy from America, one hundred and sixteen vessels loaded
with grain, which reached Brest on the 8th of June, 1794, in spite of
English cruisers, thanks to the sacrifice of the fleet that protected
it and which, eight days previously, had succumbed in its behalf.  The
third stroke of fortune is the entry of a victorious army into the
enemies country and feeding itself through foreign requisitions, in
Belgium, in the Palatinate and on the frontier provinces of Italy and
Spain.  - Finally, most fortunate of all, Robespierre, Saint Just and
Couthon, the Paris commune and the theorist Jacobins, are guillotined
on the 23rd of July, and with them falls despotic socialism.
Henceforth, the Jacobin edifice crumbles, owing to great crevices in
its walls.  The "maximum," in fact, is no longer maintained, while the
Convention, at the end of December, 1794, legally abolishes it.  The
farmers now sell as they please and at two prices, according as they
are paid in assignats or coin; their hope, confidence and courage are
restored; in October and November, 1794, they voluntarily do their own
plowing and planting, and still more gladly will they gather in their
own crops in July, 1795.  Nevertheless, we can judge by the
discouragement into which they had been plunged by four months of the
system, the utter prostration into which they would have fallen had
the system lasted an indefinite time.  It is very probable that
cultivation at the end of one or two years would have proved
unproductive or have ceased altogether.  Already, subject to every
sort of exhortation and threat, the peasant had remained inert,
apparently deaf and insensible, like an overloaded beast of burden
which, so often struck, grows obstinate or sinks down and refuses to
move.  It is evident that he would have never stirred again could
Saint-Just, holding him by the throat, have bound him hand and foot,
as he had done at Strasbourg, in the multiplied knots of his Spartan
Utopia.  We should have seen what labor and the stagnation it produces
comes to, when managed through State maneuvers by administrative
manikins and humanitarian automatons.  This experiment had been tried
in China, in the eleventh century, and according to principles, long
and regularly, by a well manipulated and omnipotent State, on the most
industrious and soberest people in the world, and men died in myriads
like flies.  If the French, at the end of 1794 and during the
following years did not die like flies, it was because the Jacobin
system was relaxed too soon.[98]

VI.  Relaxation.

Relaxation of the Revolutionary system after Thermidor.  - Repeal of
the Maximum.  -  New situation of the peasant.  - He begins to
cultivation again.  - Requisition of grain by the State.  - The
cultivator indemnifies himself at the expense of private persons.  -
Multiplication and increasing decline of Assignats.  The classes who
have to bear the burden.  - Famine and misery during year III, and the
first half of year IV.  - In the country.- In the small towns.  - In
large towns and cities.

But, if the Jacobin system, in spite of its surviving founders,
gradually relaxes after Thermidor; if the main ligature tied around
the man's neck, broke just as the man was strangling, the others that
still bind him hold him tight, except as they are loosened in places;
and, as it is, some of the straps, terribly stiffened, sink deeper and
deeper into his flesh.  - In the first place, the requisitions
continue there is no other way of provisioning the armies and the
cities; the gendarme is always on the road, compelling each village to
contribute its portion of grain, and at the legal rate.  The
refractory are subject to keepers, confiscations, fines and
imprisonment; they are confined and kept in the district lock ups "at
their own expense," men and women, twenty two on Pluviôse 17, year
III., in the district of Bar-sur-Aube ; forty five, Germinal 7, in the
district of Troyes ; forty-five, the same day, in the district of
Nogent-sur-Seine, and twenty others, eight days later, in the same
district, in the commune of Traine alone.[99] - The condition of the
cultivator is certainly not an easy one, while public authority, aided
by the public force, extorts from him all it can at a rate of its own;
moreover, it will soon exact from him one half of his contributions in
kind, and, it must be noted, that at this time, the direct
contributions alone absorb twelve and thirteen sous on the franc of
the revenue.  Nevertheless, under this condition, which is that of
laborers in a Muslim country, the French peasant, like the Syrian or
Tunisian peasant, can keep himself alive; for, through the abolition
of the "maximum," private transactions are now free, and, to indemnify
himself on this side, he sells to private individuals and even to
towns,[100] by agreement, on understood terms, and as dear as he
pleases; all the dearer because through the legal requisitions the
towns are half empty, and there are fewer sacks of grain for a larger
number of purchasers ; hence his losses by the government are more
than made up by his gains on private parties; he gains in the end, and
that is why he persists in farming.

The weight, however, of which he relieves himself falls upon the
overburdened buyer, and this weight, already excessive, goes on
increasing, through another effect of the revolutionary institution,
until it becomes ten-fold and even a hundred-fold.  - The only money,
in fact, which private individuals possess melts away in their hands,
and, so to say, destroys itself.  When the guillotine stops working,
the assignat, losing its official value, falls to its real value.  In
August, 1794, the loss on it is sixty six per cent., in October,
seventy two per cent., in December, seventy eight per cent., in
January, 1795, eighty one per cent., and after that date the constant
issues of enormous amounts, five hundred millions, then a billion, a
billion and a half, and, finally, two billions a month, hastens its
depreciation.[101] The greater the depreciation of the assignats the
greater the amount the government is obliged to issue to provide for
its expenses, and the more it issues the more it causes their
depreciation, so that the decline which increases the issue increases
the depreciation, until, finally, the assignat comes down to nothing.
On March II, 1795, the louis d'or brings two hundred and five francs
in assignats, May 11, four hundred francs, June 12, one thousand
francs, in the month of October, one thousand seven hundred francs,
November 13, two thousand eight hundred and fifty francs, November 21
three thousand francs, and six months later, nineteen thousand francs.
Accordingly, an assignat of one hundred francs is worth in June, 1795,
four francs, in August three francs, in November fifteen sous, in
December ten sous, and then five sous.  Naturally, all provisions rise
proportionately in price.  A pound of bread in Paris, January 2, 1796,
costs fifty francs, a pound of meat sixty francs, a pound of candles
one hundred and eighty francs, a bushel of potatoes two hundred
francs, a bottle of wine one hundred francs.  The reader may imagine,
if he can, the distress of people with small incomes, pensioners and
employees, mechanics and artisans in the towns out of work,[102] in
brief, all who have nothing but a small package of assignats to live
on, and who have nothing to do, whose indispensable wants are not
directly supplied by the labor of their own hands in producing wine,
candles, meat, potatoes and bread.

Immediately after the abolition of the "maximum,"[103] the cry of
hunger increases.  From month to month its accents become more painful
and vehement in proportion to the increased dearness of provisions,
especially in the summer of 1795, as the harvesting draws near, when
the granaries, filled by the crop of 1794, are getting empty.  And
these hungering cries go up by millions: for a good many of the
departments in France do not produce sufficient grain for home
consumption, this being the case in fertile wheat departments, and
likewise in certain districts; cries also go up from the large and
small towns, while in each village numbers of peasants fast because
they have no land to provide them with food, or because they lack
strength, health, employment and wages.  "For a fortnight past,"
writes a municipal body in Seine-et-Marne,[104] "at least two hundred
citizens in our commune are without bread, grain and flour; they have
had no other food than bran and vegetables.  We see with sorrow
children deprived of nourishment, their nurses without milk, unable to
suckle them; old men falling down through inanition, and young men in
the fields too weak to stand up to their work." And other communes in
the district "are about in the same condition." The same spectacle is
visible throughout the Ile-de-France, Normandy, and in Picardy.
Around Dieppe, in the country,[105] entire communes support themselves
on herbs and bran.  "Citizen representatives," write the
administrators, "we can no longer maintain ourselves.  Our fellow
citizens reproach us with having despoiled them of their grain in
favor of the large communes." - "All means of subsistence are
exhausted," writes the district of Louviers;[106] "we are reduced here
for a month past to eating bran bread and boiled herbs, and even this
rude food is getting scarce.  Bear in mind that we have seventy-one
thousand people to govern, at this very time subject to all the
horrors of famine, a large number of them having already perished,
some with hunger and others with diseases engendered by the poor food
they live on.  " - In the Caen district,[107] "the unripe peas, horse
peas, beans, and green barley and rye are attacked;" mothers and
children go after these in the fields in default of other food; "other
vegetables in the gardens are already consumed; furniture, the
comforts of the well to do class, have become the prey of the farming
egoist; having nothing more to sell they consequently have nothing
with which to obtain a morsel of bread."

 " It is impossible," writes the representative on mission, "to wait
for the crop without further aid.  As long as bran lasted the people
ate that; none can now be found and despair is at its height.  I have
not seen the sun since I came.  The harvest will be a month behind.
What shall we do? What will become of us?" - "In Picardy," writes the
Beauvais district, "the great majority of people in the rural communes
search the woods" to find mushrooms, berries and wild fruits.[108]
"They think themselves lucky," says the Bapaume district, "if they can
get a share of the food of animals." "In many communes," the district
of Vervier reports, "the inhabitants are reduced to living on
herbage." "Many families, entire communes," reports the Laon
commissary, "have been without bread two or three months and live on
bran or herbs.  .  .  .  Mothers of families, children, old men,
pregnant women, come to the (members of the) Directory for bread and
often faint in their arms.

And yet, great as the famine is in the country it is worse in the
towns; and the proof of it is that the starving people flock into the
country to find whatever they can to live on, no matter how, and,
generally speaking, in vain.  - "Three quarters of our fellow
citizens," writes the Rozoy municipality,[109] "are forced to quit
work and overrun the country here and there, among the farmers, to
obtain bread for specie, and with more entreaty than the poorest
wretches; for the most part, they return with tears in their eyes at
not being able to find, not merely a bushel of wheat, but a pound of
bread."  "Yesterday," writes the Montreuil-sur-Mer municipality,[110]
"more than two hundred of our citizens set out to beg in the country,"
and, when they get nothing, they steal.  "Bands of brigands[111]
spread through the country and pillage all dwellings anywise remote.
.  .  .  Grain, flour, bread, cattle, poultry, stuffs, etc., all come
in play.  Our terrified shepherds are no longer willing to sleep in
their sheep pens and are leaving us." The most timid dig Carrots at
night or, during the day, gather dandelions; but their town stomachs
cannot digest this food.  "Lately," writes the procureur- syndic of
Saint-Germain,[112] "the corpse of a father of a family, found in the
fields with his mouth still filled with the grass he had striven to
chew, exasperates and arouses the spirit of the poor creatures
awaiting a similar fate."

What then, do people in the towns do in order to survive? - In small
towns or scattered villages, each municipality, using what gendarmes
it has, makes legal requisitions in its vicinity, and sometimes the
commune obtains from the government a charitable gift of wheat, oats,
rice or assignats.  But the quantity of grain it receives is so small,
one asks how it is that, after two months, six months or a year of
such a system, that half of the inhabitants are not in the grave yard.
I suppose that many of them live on what they raise in their gardens,
or on their small farms; others are helped by their relations,
neighbors and companions; in any event, it is clear that the human
body is very resistant, and a few mouthfuls suffice to keep it going a
long time.  - At Ervy,[113] in Aube, "not a grain of wheat has been
brought in the last two market days." "To morrow,[114] Prairial 25, in
Bapaume, the main town of the district, there will be only two bushels
of flour left (for food of any sort)." "At Boulogne-sur-Mer, for the
past ten days, there has been distributed to each person only three
pounds of bad barley, or maslin, without knowing whether we can again
distribute this miserable ration next decade." Out of sixteen hundred
inhabitants in Brionne, "twelve hundred and sixty[115] are reduced to
the small portion of wheat they receive at the market, and which,
unfortunately, for too long a time, has been reduced from eight to
three ounces of wheat for each person, every eight days." For three
months past, in Seine et Marne,[116] in "the commune of Meaux, that of
Laferté, Lagny, Daumartin, and other principal towns of the canton,
they have had only half a pound per head, for each day, of bad bread."
In Seine et Oise, "citizens of the neighborhood of Paris and even of
Versailles[117] state that they are reduced to four ounces of bread."
At Saint-Denis,[118] with a population of six thousand, "a large part
of the inhabitants, worn out with suffering, betake themselves to the
charity depots.  Workmen, especially, cannot do their work for lack of
food.  A good many women, mothers and nurses, have been found in their
houses unconscious, without any sign of life in them, and many have
died with their infants at their breasts." Even in a larger and less
forsaken town, Saint-Germain,[119] the misery surpasses all that one
can imagine.  "Half-a-pound of flour for each inhabitant," not daily,
but at long intervals; "bread at fifteen and sixteen francs the pound
and all other provisions at the same rate; a people which is sinking,
losing hope and perishing.  Yesterday, for the fête of the 9th of
Thermidor, not a sign of rejoicing; on the contrary, symptoms of
general and profound depression, tottering specters in the streets,
mournful shrieks of ravaging hunger or shouts of rage, almost every
one, driven to the last extremity of misery, welcoming death as a
boon."

Such is the aspect of these huge artificial agglomerations, where the
soil, made sterile by habitation, bears only stones, and where twenty,
thirty, fifty and a hundred thousand suffering stomachs have to obtain
from ten, twenty and thirty leagues off their first and last mouthful
of food.  Within these close pens long lines of human sheep huddle
together every day bleating and trembling around almost empty troughs,
and only through extraordinary efforts do the shepherds daily succeed
in providing them with a little nourishment.  The central government,
strenuously appealed to, enlarges or defines the circle of their
requisitions; it authorizes them to borrow, to tax themselves; it
lends or gives to them millions of assignats;[120] frequently, in
cases of extreme want, it allows them to take so much grain or rice
from its storehouses, for a week's supply.  - But, in truth, this sort
of life is not living, it is only not dying.  For one half, and more
than one half of the inhabitants simply subsist on rations of bread
obtained by long waiting for it at the end of a string of people and
delivered at a reduced price.  What rations and what bread! "It
seems," says the municipality of Troyes, "that[121] the country has
anathematized the towns.  Formerly, the finest grain was brought to
market; the farmer kept the inferior quality and consumed it at home.
Now it is the reverse, and this is carried still further, for, not
only do we receive no wheat whatever, but the farmers give us sprouted
barley and rye, which they reserve for our commune; the farmer who has
none arranges with those who have, so as to buy it and deliver it in
town, and sell his good wheat elsewhere.  Half a pound per day and per
head, in Pluviôse , to the thirteen thousand or fourteen thousand
indigent in Troyes; then a quarter of a pound, and, finally, two
ounces with a little rice and some dried vegetables, "which feeble
resource is going to fail us."[122]  Half a pound in Pluviôse , to the
twenty thousand needy in Amiens, which ration is only nominal, for "it
often happens that each individual gets only four ounces, while the
distribution has repeatedly failed three days in succession,'' and
this continues.  Six months later, Fructidor 7, Amiens has but sixty
nine quintals of flour in its market storehouse, "an insufficient
quantity for distribution this very day; to morrow, it will be
impossible to make any distribution at all, and the day after to
morrow the needy population of this commune will be brought down to
absolute famine." - "Complete desperation! There are already "many
suicides."[123] At other times, rage predominates and there are riots.
At Evreux,[124] Germinal 21, a riot breaks out, owing to the delivery
of only two pounds of flour per head and per week, and because three
days before, only a pound and a half was delivered.  There is a riot
at Dieppe,[125] Prairial 14 and 15, because "the people are reduced
here to three or four ounces of bread." There is another at Vervins,
Prairial 9, because the municipality which obtains bread at a cost of
seven and eight francs a pound, raises the price from twenty-five to
fifty sous.  At Lille, an insurrection breaks out Messidor 4, because
the municipality, paying nine francs for bread, can give it to the
poor only for about twenty and thirty sous.  - Lyons, during the month
of Nivôse, remains without bread "for five full days."[126]  At
Chartres, Thermidor 15,[127] the distribution of bread for a month is
only eight ounces a day, and there is not enough to keep this up until
the 20th of Thermidor.  On the fifteenth of Fructidor, La Rochelle
writes that "its public distributions, reduced to seven or eight
ounces of bread, are on the point of failing entirely." For four
months, at Painbuf, the ration is but the quarter of a pound of
bread.[128] And the same at Nantes, which has eighty-two thousand
inhabitants and swarms with the wretched; "the distribution never
exceeded four ounces a day," and that only for the past year.  The
same at Rouen, which contains sixty thousand inhabitants; and, in
addition, within the past fortnight the distribution has failed three
times.  In other reports, those who are well-off suffer more than the
indigent because they take no part in the communal distribution, "all
resources for obtaining food being, so to say, interdicted to them." -
Five ounces of bread per diem for four months is the allowance to the
forty thousand inhabitants of Caen and its district.[129]  A great
many in the town, as well as in the country, live on bran and wild
herbs." At the end of Prairial, "there is not a bushel of grain in the
town storehouses, while the requisitions, enforced in the most
rigorous and imposing style, produce nothing or next to nothing."
Misery augments from week to week: "it is impossible to form any idea
of it; the people of Caen live on brown bread and the blood of cattle.
.  .  .  Every countenance bears traces of the famine.  .  .  Faces
are of livid hue.  .  .  .  It is impossible to await the new crop,
until the end of Fructidor." - Such are the exclamations everywhere.
The object now, indeed, is to cross the narrowest and most terrible
defile; a fortnight more of absolute fasting and hundreds of thousands
of lives would be sacrificed.[130] At this moment the government half
opens the doors of its storehouses; it lends a few sacks of flour on
condition of re-payment, - for example, at Cherbourg a few hundreds of
quintals of oats; by means of oat bread, the poor can subsist until
the coming harvest.  But above all, it doubles its guard and shows its
bayonets.  At Nancy, a traveler sees[131] "more than three thousand
persons soliciting in vain for a few pounds of flour." They are
dispersed with the butt-ends of muskets.  - Thus are the peasantry
taught patriotism and the townspeople patience.  Physical constraint
exercised on all in the name of all; this is the only procedure which
an arbitrary socialism can resort to for the distribution of food and
to discipline starvation.



VII.  Misery at Paris.

Famine and misery at Paris.  - Steps taken by the government to feed
the capital.  - Monthly cost to the Treasury.  - Cold and hunger in
the winter of 1794-1795.  - Quality of the bread.  - Daily rations
diminished.  - Suffering, especially of the populace.  - Excessive
physical suffering, despair, suicides, and deaths from exhaustion in
1795.  - Government dinners and suppers.  - Number of lives lost
through want and war.  - Socialism as applied, and its effects on
comfort, well-being and mortality.

Anything that a totalitarian government may do to ensure that the
capital is supplied with food is undertaken and carried out by this
one, for here is its seat, and one more degree of dearth in Paris
would overthrow it.  Each week, on reading the daily reports of its
agents,[132] it finds itself on the verge of explosion; twice, in
Germinal and Prairial, a popular outbreak does overthrow it for a few
hours, and, if it maintains itself, it is on the condition of either
giving the needy a piece of bread or the hope of getting it.
Consequently, military posts are spaced out around Paris, up to
eighteen leagues off, on all the highways; permanent patrols in
correspondence with each other to urge on the wagoners and draft
relays of horses on the spot.  Escorts dispatched from Paris to meet
convoys;[133] requisition "all the carts and all the horses whatever
to effect transportation in preference to any other work or service."
All communes traversed by a highway are ordered to put rubble and
manure on the bad spots and cover the whole way with a layer of soil,
so that the horses may drag their loads in spite of the slippery road.
The national agents are ordered to draft the necessary number of men
to break the ice around the water-mills.[134] A requisition is made
for "all the barley throughout the length and breadth of the Republic,
" this must be utilized to produce "the mixture for making bread,"
while the brewers are forbidden to use barley in the manufacture of
beer; the starch makers are forbidden to convert potatoes into starch,
with penalty of death against all offenders "as destroyers of
alimentary produce;" the breweries and starch-factories[135] are to be
closed until further notice.  Paris must have grain, no matter of what
kind, no matter how, and at any cost, not merely in the following
week, but to-morrow, this very day, because hunger chews and swallows
everything, and it will not wait.  - Once the grain is obtained, a
price must be fixed which people can pay.  Now, the difference between
the selling and cost price is enormous; it keeps on increasing as the
assignat declines and it is the government which pays this.  "You
furnish bread at three sous," said Dubois-Crancé, Floréal 16, year
III,[136] "and it costs you four francs.  Paris consumes 8,000
quintals of meal daily, which expenditure alone amounts to 1,200
millions per annum." Seven months later, when a bag of flour brings
13,000 francs, the same expenditure reaches 546 millions per month.  -
Under the ancient régime, Paris, although overgrown, continued to be
an useful organism; if it absorbed much, it elaborated more; its
productiveness compensated for what it consumed, and, every year,
instead of exhausting the public treasury it poured 77 millions into
it.  The new régime has converted it into a monstrous canker in the
very heart of France, a devouring parasite which, through its six
hundred thousand leeches, drains its surroundings for a distance of
forty leagues, consumes one-half the annual revenue of the State, and
yet still remains emaciated in spite of the sacrifices made by the
treasury it depletes and the exhaustion of the provinces which supply
it with food.

Always the same alimentary system, the same long lines of people
waiting at, and before, dawn in every quarter of Paris, in the dark,
for a long time, and often to no purpose, subject to the brutalities
of the strong and the outrages of the licentious! On the 9th of
Thermidor, the daily trot of the multitude in quest of food has lasted
uninterruptedly for seventeen months, accompanied with outrages of the
worst kind because there is less terror and less submissiveness, with
more obstinacy because provisions at free sale are dearer, with
greater privation because the ration distributed is smaller, and with
more sombre despair because each household, having consumed its
stores, has nothing of its own to make up for the insufficiencies of
public charity. -  And to cap it all, the winter of 1794-1795 is so
cold[137] that the Seine freezes and people cross the Loire on foot.
Rafts no longer arrive and, to obtain fire-wood, it is necessary "to
cut down trees at Boulogne, Vincennes, Verrières, St.  Cloud, Meudon
and two other forests in the vicinity." Fuel costs "four hundred
francs per cord of wood, forty sous for a bushel of charcoal, twenty
sous for a small basket.  The needy are seen in the streets sawing the
wood of their bedsteads to cook with and to keep from freezing." On
the resumption of transportation by water amongst the cakes of ice
"rafts are sold as fast as the raftsmen can haul the wood out of the
water, the people being obliged to pass three nights at the landing to
get it, each in turn according to his number." "On Pluviôse 3 at least
two thousand persons are at the Louviers landing," each with his card
allowing him four sticks at fifteen sous each.  Naturally, there is
pulling, hauling, tumult and a rush; "the dealers take to flight for
fear, and the inspectors come near being murdered;" they get away
along with the police commissioner and "the public helps itself."
Likewise, the following day, there is "an abominable pillage;" the
gendarmes and soldiers placed there to maintain order, "make a rush
for the wood and carry it away together with the crowd." Bear in mind
that on this day the thermometer is sixteen degrees below zero, that
one hundred, two hundred other lines of people likewise stand waiting
at the doors of bakers and butchers, enduring the same cold, and that
they have already endured it and will yet endure it a month and more.
Words are wanting to describe the sufferings of these long lines of
motionless beings, during the night, at daybreak, standing there five
or six hours, with the blast driving through their rags and their feet
freezing.  - Ventôse is beginning, and the ration of bread is reduced
to a pound and a half;[138] Ventôse ends, and the ration of bread,
kept at a pound and a half for the three hundred and twenty-four
laborers, falls to one pound; in fact, a great many get none at all,
many only a half and a quarter of a pound.  Germinal follows and the
Committee of Public Safety, finding that its magazines are giving out,
limits all rations to a quarter of a pound.  Thereupon, on the 12th of
Germinal, an insurrection of workmen and women breaks out; the
Convention is invaded and liberated by military force.  Paris is
declared in a state of siege and the government, again in the saddle,
tightens the reins.  Thenceforth, the ration of meat served out every
four or five days, is a quarter of a pound; bread averages every day,
sometimes five, sometimes six and sometimes seven ounces, at long
intervals eight ounces, often three, two and one ounce and a half, or
even none at all; while this bread, black and "making mischief,"
becomes more and more worthless and detestable.[139] People who are
well off live on potatoes, but only for them, for, in the middle of
Germinal, these cost fifteen francs the bushel and, towards the end,
twenty francs; towards the end of Messidor, forty-five francs; in the
first month of the Directory, one hundred and eighty francs, and then
two hundred and eighty-four francs, whilst other produce goes up at
the same rates.  - After the abolition of the "maximum " the evil
springs not from a lack of provisions, but from their dearness: the
shops are well supplied.  Whoever comes with a full purse gets what he
wants[140]: The former rich, the property owners and large
capitalists, may eat on the condition that they hand their bundles of
assignats over, that they withdrawing their last louis from its
hiding-place, that they sell their jewelry, clocks, furniture and
clothes.  And the nouveaux rich, the speculators, the suppliers, the
happy and extravagant robbers, spend four hundred, one thousand, three
thousand, then five thousand francs for their dinner, and revel in the
great eating establishments on fine wines and exquisite cheer: the
burden of the scarcity is transferred to other shoulders.  - At
present, the class which suffers, and which suffers beyond all bounds
of patience is, together with employees and people with small
incomes,[141] the crowd of workmen, the City plebeians, the low
Parisian populace

* which lives from day to day,
* which is Jacobin at heart,
* which made the Revolution in order to better itself,
* which finds itself worse off,
* which gets up one insurrection more on the 1st of Prairial,
* which forcibly enters the Tuileries yelling "Bread and the
Constitution of '93,"
* which installs itself as sovereign in the Convention,
* which murders the Representative Féraud,
* which decrees a return to Terror,
but which, put down by the National Guard, disarmed and forced back
into lasting obedience, has only to submit to the consequences of its
own outrages, the socialism it has itself instituted and the
economical system it itself has organized.

Because the workers of Paris have been usurpers and tyrants they are
now beggars.  Owing to the ruin brought on proprietors and capitalists
by them, individuals can no longer employ them.  Owing to the ruin
they have brought on the Treasury, the State can provide them with
only the semblance of charity, and hence, while all are compelled to
go hungry, a great many die, and many commit suicide.

* On Germinal 6th, "Section of the Observatory,"[142] at the
distribution, "forty-one persons had been without bread; several
pregnant women desired immediate confinement so as to destroy their
infants; others asked for knives to stab themselves."

* On Germinal 8th," a large number of persons who had passed the night
at the doors of the bakeries were obliged to leave without getting any
bread."

* On Germinal 24th, "the police commissioner of the Arsenal section
states that many become ill for lack of food, and that he buries quite
a number....  The same day, he has heard of five or six citizens, who,
finding themselves without bread, and unable to get other food, throw
themselves into the Seine."

* Germinal 27, "the women say that they feel so furious and are in
such despair on account of hunger and want that they must inevitably
commit some act of violence.  .  .  .  In the section of 'Les Amis de
la Patrie,' one half have no bread.  .  .  .  Three persons tumbled
down through weakness on the Boulevard du Temple."

* Floréal 2, "most of the workmen in the 'République' section are
leaving Paris on account of the scarcity of bread."

* Floréal 5, "eighteen out of twenty-four inspectors state that
patience is exhausted and that things are coming to an end."

* Floréal 14, "the distribution is always unsatisfactory on account of
the four-ounce ration; two thirds of the citizens do without it.  One
woman, on seeing the excitement of her husband and her four children
who had been without bread for two days, trailed through the gutter
tearing her hair and striking her head; she then got up in a state of
fury and attempted to drown herself."

* Floréal 20, "all exclaim that they cannot live on three ounces of
bread, and, again, of such bad quality.  Mothers and pregnant women
fall down with weakness."

* Floréal 21, "the inspectors state that they encounter many persons
in the streets who have fallen through feebleness and inanition."

* Floréal 23, "a citoyenne who had no bread for her child tied it to
her side and jumped into the river.  Yesterday, an individual named
Mottez, in despair through want, cut his throat."

* Floréal 25, "several persons, deprived of any means of existence,
gave up in complete discouragement, and fell down with weakness and
exhaustion.  .  .  .  In the 'Gravilliers' section, two men were found
dead with inanition.  .  .  .  The peace officers report the decease
of several citizens; one cut his throat, while another was found dead
in his bed." Floréal 28, "numbers of people sink down for lack of
something to eat; yesterday, a man was found dead and others exhausted
through want."

* Prairial 24, "Inspector Laignier states that the indigent are
compelled to seek nourishment in the piles of garbage on the corners."

* Messidor 1,[143] "the said Picard fell through weakness at ten
o'clock in the morning in the rue de la Loi, and was only brought to
at seven o'clock in the evening; he was carried to the hospital on a
hand-barrow."

* Messidor 11, "There is a report that the number of people trying to
drown themselves is so great that the nets at St.  Cloud scarcely
suffice to drag them out of the water."

* Messidor 19, "A man was found on the corner of a street just dead
with hunger."

* Messidor 27, "At four o'clock in the afternoon, Place Maubert, a man
named Marcelin, employed in the Jardin des Plantes, fell down through
starvation and died while assistance was being given to him." On the
previous evening, the anniversary of the taking of the Bastille, a
laborer on the Pont-au-Change, says " I have eaten nothing all day.
''Another replies : " I have not been home because I have nothing to
give to my wife and children, dying with hunger." About the same date,
a friend of Mallet-Dupan writes to him "that he is daily witness to
people amongst the lower classes dying of inanition in the streets;
others, and principally women, have nothing but garbage to live on,
scraps of refuse vegetables and the blood running out of the slaughter
houses.  Laborers, generally, work on short time on account of their
lack of strength and of their exhaustion for want of food."[144] -

Thus ends the rule of the Convention.  Well has it looked out for the
interests of the poor! According to the reports of its own inspectors,
"famished stomachs on all sides cry vengeance, beat to arms and sound
the tocsin of alarm[145] .  .  .  .  Those who have to dwell daily on
the sacrifices they make to keep themselves alive declare that there
is no hope except in death." Are they going to be relieved by the new
government which the Convention imposes on them with thunders of
artillery and in which it perpetuates itself?[146] -

* Brumaire 28, " Most of the workmen in the 'Temple' and 'Gravilliers'
sections have done no work for want of bread."

* Brumaire 24, "Citizens of all classes refuse to mount guard because
they have nothing to eat."

* Brumaire 25, "In the 'Gravilliers' section the women say that they
have sold all that they possessed, while others, in the 'Faubourg-
Antoine' section, declare that it would be better to be shot down."

* Brumaire 30, "A woman beside herself came and asked a baker to kill
her children as she had nothing to give them to eat."

* Frimaire 1, 2, 3, and 4, "In many of the sections bread is given out
only in the evening, in others at one o'clock in the morning, and of
very poor quality....  Several sections yesterday had no bread."

* Frimaire 7, the inspectors declare that "the hospitals soon will not
be vast enough to hold the sick and the wretched."

* Frimaire 14, At the central market a woman nursing her child sunk
down with inanition." A few days before this, "a man fell down from
weakness, on his way to Bourg l'Abbé."

 " All our reports," say the district administrators, "resound with
shrieks of despair." People are infatuated; "it seems to us that a
crazy spirit prevails universally, we often encounter people in the
street who, although alone, gesticulate and talk to themselves aloud."
"How many times," writes a Swiss traveller,[147] who lived in Paris
during the latter half of 1795, "how often have I chanced to encounter
men sinking through starvation, scarcely able to stand up against a
post, or else down on the ground and unable to get up for want of
strength !" A journalist states that he saw "within ten minutes, along
the street, seven poor creatures fall on account of hunger, a child
die on its mother's breast which was dry of milk, and a woman
struggling with a dog near a sewer to get a bone away from him."[148]
Meissner never leaves his hotel without filling his pockets with
pieces of the national bread.  "This bread," he says, "which the poor
would formerly have despised, I found accepted with the liveliest
gratitude, and by well educated persons;" the lady who contended with
the dog for the bone was a former nun, without either parents or
friends and everywhere repulsed." "I still hear with a shudder," says
Meissner, "the weak, melancholy voice of a well-dressed woman who
stopped me in the rue du Bac, to tell me in accents indicative both of
shame and despair: 'Ah, Sir, do help me! I am not an outcast.  I have
some talent - you may have seen some of my works in the salon.  I have
had nothing to eat for two days and I am crazy for want of food.'"
Again, in June, 1796, the inspectors state that despair and
despondency have reached the highest point, only one cry being heard-
misery !..  .  .  Our reports all teem with groans and complaints.  .
.  .  Pallor and suffering are stamped on all faces.  .  .  .  Each
day presents a sadder and more melancholy aspect." And
repeatedly,[149] they sum up their scattered observations in a general
statement:

* "A mournful silence, the deepest distress on every countenance;
* the most intense hatred of the government in general developed in
all conversations;
* contempt for all existing authority;
* an insolent luxuriousness, insulting to the wretchedness of the poor
rentiers who expire with hunger in their garrets, no longer possessing
the courage to crawl to the Treasury and get the wherewithal to
prolong their misery for a few days;
* the worthy father of a family daily deciding what article of
furniture he will sell to make up for what is lacking in his wages
that he may buy a half-pound of bread;
* every sort of provision increasing in price sixty times an hour;
* the smallest business dependent on the fall of assignats;
* intriguers of all parties overthrowing each other only to get
offices;
* the intoxicated soldier boasting of the services he has rendered and
is to render, and abandoning himself shamelessly to every sort of
debauchery;
* commercial houses transformed into dens of thieves;
* rascals become traders and traders become rascals; the most sordid
cupidity and a mortal egoism-

such is the picture presented by Paris."[150]

One group is wanting in this picture, that of the governors who
preside over this wretchedness, which group remains in the background;
one might say that it was so designed and composed by some great
artist, a lover of contrasts, an inexorable logician, whose invisible
hand traces human character unvaryingly, and whose mournful irony
unfailingly depicts side by side, in strong relief, the grotesqueness
of folly and the seriousness of death.  How many perished on account
of this misery? Probably more than a million persons.[151] -

 Try to take in at a glance the extraordinary spectacle presented on
twenty-six thousand square leagues of territory:

* The immense multitude of the starving in town and country,
* the long lines of women for three years waiting for bread in all the
cities,
* this or that town of twenty-three thousand souls in which one-third
of the population dies in the hospitals in three months,
* the crowds of paupers at the poor-houses,
* the file of poor wretches entering and the file of coffins going
out,
* the asylums deprived of their property, overcrowded with the sick,
unable to feed the multitude of foundlings pining away in their
cradles the very first week, their little faces in wrinkles like those
of old men,
* the malady of want aggravating all other maladies, the long
suffering of a persistent vitality amidst pain and which refuses to
succumb, the final death-rattle in a garret or in a ditch.

Contrast this with this the small, powerful, triumphant group of
Jacobins which, having understood how to place themselves in the good
places, is determined to stay there at any cost.  - About ten o'clock
in the morning,[152] Cambacérès, president of the Committee of Public
Safety, is seen entering its hall in the Pavillon de l'Egalité.  He is
a large, cautious and shrewd personage who will, later on, become
arch-chancellor of the Empire and famous for his epicurean inventions
and other peculiar tastes revived from antiquity.  Scarcely seated, he
orders an ample pat-au-feu to be placed on the chimney hearth and, on
the table, "fine wine and fine white bread; three articles," says a
guest, " not to be found elsewhere in all Paris." Between twelve and
two o'clock, his colleagues enter the room in turn, take a plate of
soup and a slice of meat, swallow some wine, and then proceed, each to
his bureau, to receive his coterie, giving this one an office and
compelling another to pay up, looking all the time after his own
special interests.  At this moment, especially, towards the close of
the Convention, there are no public interests, all interests being
private and personal.  - In the mean time, the deputy in charge of
provisions, Roux de la Haute Marne, an unfrocked Benedictine, formerly
a terrorist in the provinces, subsequently the protégé and employee of
Fouché, with whom he is to be associated in the police department,
keeps the throng of women in check which daily resorts to the
Tuileries to beg for bread.  He is well adapted for this duty, being
tall, chubby, ornamental, and with vigorous lungs.  He has taken his
office in the right place, in the attic of the palace, at the top of
long, narrow and steep stairs, so that the line of women stretching up
between the two walls, piled one above the other, necessarily becomes
immovable.  With the exception of the two or three at the front, no
one has her hands free to grab the haranguer by the throat and close
the oratorical stop-cock.  He can spout his tirades accordingly with
impunity, and for an indefinite time.  On one occasion, his sonorous
jabber rattles away uninterruptedly from the top to the bottom of the
staircase, from nine o'clock in the morning to five o'clock in the
afternoon.  Under such a voluble shower, his hearers become weary and
end by going home. - About nine or ten o'clock in the evening, the
Committee of Public Safety reassembles, but not to discuss business.
Danton and La Révellière preach in vain; each is too egoistic and too
worn-out; they let the rein slacken on Cambacérès.  As to him, he
would rather keep quiet and drag the cart no longer; but there are two
things necessary which he must provide for on pain of death.  - "It
will not do," says he in plaintive tones, "to keep on printing the
assignats at night which we want for the next day.  If that lasts, ma
foi, we run the risk of being strung up at a lantern.  .  .Go and find
Hourier-Eloi, as he has charge of the finances, and tell him that we
entreat him to keep us a-going for a fortnight or eighteen days
longer, when the executive Directory will come in and do what it
pleases." " But food - shall we have enough for to-morrow?

"Aha, I don't know - I'll send for our colleague Roux, who will post
us on that point." Roux enters, the official spokesman, the fat,
jovial tamer of the popular dog.  "Well, Roux, how do we stand about
supplying Paris with food?" "The supply, citizen President, is just as
abundant as ever, two ounces per head, - at least for most of the
sections." "Go to the devil with your abundant supply! You'll have our
heads off! " All remain silent, for this possible dénouement sets them
to thinking.  Then, one of them exclaims: "President, are there any
refreshments provided for us? After working so hard for so many days
we need something to strengthen us !" "Why, yes ; there is a good
calf's-tongue, a large turbot, a large piece of pie and some other
things." They cheer up, begin to eat and drink champagne, and indulge
in drolleries.  About eleven or twelve o'clock the members of other
Committees come in; signatures are affixed to their various decrees,
on trust, without reading them over.  They, in their turn, sit down at
the table and the conclave of sovereign bellies digests without giving
itself further trouble about the millions of stomachs that are empty.

_______________________________________________________________________-

Notes:

[1] On the other more complicated functions, such as the maintenance
of roads, canals, harbors, public buildings, lighting, cleanliness,
hygiene, superior secondary and primary education, hospitals, and
other asylums, highway security, the suppression of robbery and
kindred crimes, the destruction of wolves, etc., see Rocquam, "Etat de
la France au 18 Brumaire," and the "Statistiques des Departements,"
published by the prefets, from years IX.  to XIII.  - These branches
of the service were almost entirely overthrown; the reader will see
the practical results of their suppression in the documents referred
to.

[2] "St.  John de Crêvecur," by Robert de Crêvecur, p.216.  (Letter
of Mdlle.  de Gouves, July, 1800.) "We are negotiating for the payment
of, at least, the arrearages since 1789 on the Arras property." (M.
de Gouves and his sisters had not emigrated, and yet they had had no
income from their property for ten years.)

[3] Cf.  "The Revolution," vol.  I., 254-261, 311-352; vol.  II., 234-
272.

[4] Cf.  "The Revolution," II., 273-276.

[5] Buchez et Roux, XXII., 178.  (Speech by Robespierre in the
Convention, December 2, 1792.) - Mallet-Dupan, "Mémoires." I., 400.
About the same date, "a deputation from the department of Gard
expressly demands a sum of two hundred and fifty millions, as
indemnity to the cultivator, for grain which it calls national
property." - This fearful sum of two hundred and fifty millions, they
add, is only a fictive advance, placing at its disposal real and
purely national wealth, not belonging in full ownership to any
distinct member of the social body any more than the pernicious metals
minted as current coin."

[6] Buchez et Roux, XXVI., 95.  (Declaration of Rights presented in
the Jacobin Club, April 21, 1793.)

[7] Decrees in every commune establishing a tax on the rich in order
to render the price of bread proportionate to wages, also in each
large city to raise an army of paid sans-culottes, that will keep
aristocrats under their pikes, April 5-7.  - Decree ordering the
forced loan of a billion on the rich, May 20-25- - Buchez et Roux,
XXV., 156.  (Speech by Charles, March 27.  - Gorsas, "Courrier des
Départements," No.  for May I5, 1793.  (Speech by Simon in the club at
Annecy.) - Speech by Guffroy at Chartres, and of Chalier and
associates at Lyons, etc.

[8] Report by Minister Claviéres, February 1, 1793, p.  27.  - Cf.
Report of M. de Montesquiou, September 9, 1791, p.  47.  "During the
first twenty-six months of the Revolution the taxes brought in three
hundred and fifty-six millions less than they should naturally have
done." - There is the same deficit in the receipts of the towns,
especially on account of the abolition of the octroi.  Paris, under
this head, loses ten millions per annum.

[9] Report by Cambon, Pluviôse 3, year III.  "The Revolution and the
war have cost in four years five thousand three hundred and fifty
millions above the ordinary expenses." (Cambon, in his estimates,
purposely exaggerates ordinary expenses of the monarchy.  According to
Necker's budget, the expenditure in 1759 was fixed at five hundred and
thirty-one millions and not, as Cambon states, seven hundred millions.
This raises the expenses of the Revolution and of the war to seven
thousand one hundred and twenty-one millions for the four and a half
years, and hence to one thousand five hundred and eighty-one millions
per annum, that is to say, to triple the ordinary expenses.) The
expenses of the cities are therefore exaggerated like those of the
State and for the same reasons.

[10] Schmidt, "Pariser Zustände," I.  93, 96.  "During the first half
of the year 1789 there were seventeen thousand men at twenty sous a
day in the national workshops at Montmartre.  In 1790, there were
nineteen thousand.  In 1791, thirty-one thousand costing sixty
thousand francs a day.  In 1790, the State expends seventy-five
millions for maintaining the price of bread in Paris at eleven sous
for four pounds.  - Ibid., 113.  During the first six months of 1793
the State pays the Paris bakers about seventy-five thousand francs a
day to keep bread at three sous the pound.

[11] Ibid.  I., 139-144.

[12] Decree of September 27, 1790.  "The circulation of assignats
shall not extend beyond one billion two hundred millions....  Those
which are paid in shall be destroyed and there shall be no other
creation or emission of them, without a decree of the Corps
Legislatif, always subject to this condition that they shall not
exceed the value of the national possions nor obtain a circulation
above one billion two hundred millions.

[13] Schmidt, ibid., I., 104, 138, 144.

[14] Felix Rocquam, "L'Etat de la France au 18 Brumaire," p.240.
(Report by Lacuée, year IX.  - Reports by préfets under the Consulate
(Reports of Laumont, préfet of the Lower-Rhine, year X.; of Coichen,
préfet of the Moselle, year XI., etc.) - Schmidt, Pariser Zustände,"
III., 205.  ("The rate of interest during the Revolution was from four
to five per cent.  per month; in 1796 from six to eight per cent.  per
month, the lowest rate being two per cent.  per month with security.")

[15] Arthur Young, "Voyage en France," II., 360.  (Fr.  translation.)
"I regard Bordeaux as richer and more commercial than any city in
England except London."

[16] Ibid., II., 357.  The statistics of exports in France in 1787
give three hundred and forty-nine millions, and imports three hundred
and forty millions (leaving out Lorraine.  Alsace, the three Evéchés
and the West Indies).-Ibid., 360.  In 1786 the importations from the
West Indies amounted to one hundred and seventy-four millions, of
which St.  Domingo furnished one hundred and thirty-one millions; the
exports to the West Indies amounted to sixty-four millions, of which
St.  Domingo had forty-four millions.  These exchanges were effected
by five hundred and sixty-nine vessels carrying one hundred and sixty-
two thousand tons, of which Bordeaux provided two hundred and forty-
six vessels, carrying seventy-five thousand tons.  - On the ruin of
manufactures cf.  the reports of préfets in the year X., with details
from each department.  - Arthur Young (II., 444) states that the
Revolution affected manufactures more seriously than any other branch
of industry.

[17] Reports of préfets.  (Orme, year IX.) "The purchasers have
speculated on the profits for the time being, and have exhausted their
resources.  Many of them have destroyed all the plantations, all the
enclosures and even the fruit trees." - Felix Rocquam, ibid., 116.
(Report by Fourcroy on Brittany.) "The condition of rural structures
everywhere demands considerable capital.  But no advances, based on
any lasting state of things, can be made." - Ibid., 236.  (Report of
Lacuée on the departments around Paris.) "The doubtful owners of
national possessions cultivate badly and let things largely go to
ruin."

[18] Reports by préfets, years X.  and XI.  In general, the effect of
the partition of communal possessions was disastrous, especially
pasture and mountain grounds.  - (Doubs.) "The partition of the
communal property has contributed, in all the communes, rather to the
complete ruin of the poor than to any amelioration of their fate." -
(Lozére.) "The partition of the communal property by the law of June
10, 1792, has proved very injurious to cultivation." These partitions
were numerous.  (Moselle.) "Out of six hundred and eighty-six
communes, one hundred and seven have divided per capitum, five hundred
and seventy-nine by families, and one hundred and nineteen have
remained intact."

[19] Ibid.  (Moselle.) Births largely increase in 1792.  "But this is
an exceptional year.  All kinds of abuses, paper-money, the non-
payment of taxes and claims, the partition in the communes, the sale
for nothing of national possessions, has spread so much comfort among
the people that the poorer classes, who are the most numerous, have
had no dread of increasing their families1 to which they hope some day
to leave their fields and render them happy."

[20] Mallet-Dupan, "Memoires," II., 29.  (February 1, 1794.) "The late
crop in France was generally good, and, in some provinces, it was
above the average...  I have seen the statements of two returns made
from twenty-seven departments; they declare an excess of fifteen,
twenty, thirty and thirty-five thousand bushels of grain.  There is no
real dearth."

[21] Schmidt, ibid., I., 110, and following pages.  - Buchez et Roux,
XX., 416.  (Speeches of Lequinio, November 27, 1792.) - Moniteur,
XVII., 2.  (Letter by Clement, Puy-de-Dome, June 15, 1793.) "For the
past fifteen days bread has been worth sixteen and eighteen sous the
pound.  There is the most frightful distress in our mountains.  The
government distributes one-eighth of a bushel to each person,
everybody being obliged to wait two days to take his turn.  One woman
was smothered and several were wounded."

[22] Cf.  "La Revolution," I., 208; II., 294, 205, 230.  - Buchez et
Roux, XX., 431.  (Report of Lecointe-Puyraveau, Nov.  30, 1792.) (Mobs
of four, five and six thousand men in the departments of Eure-et-
Loire, Eure, Orme, Calvados, Indre-et-Loire, Loiret, and Sarthe cut
down the prices of produce.  The three delegates of the Convention
disposed to interfere have their lives saved only on condition of
announcing the rate dictated to them.  - Ibid., 409.  (Letter of
Roland, Nov.27, 1792.) - XXI., 198.  (Another letter by Roland, Dec.
6, 1792.) "All convoys are stopped at Lissy, la Ferté, Milan, la
Ferté-sous-Jouarre .  .  .  Carts loaded with wheat going to Paris
have been forced to go back near Lonjumeau and near Meaux."

[23] Archives Nationales, F.  7, 3265.  (Letter of David, cultivator,
and administrator of the department of Seine-Inférieure, Oct.11, 1792;
letter of the special committee of Rouen, Oct.22; letter of the
delegates of the executive power, Oct.20, etc.) "Reports from all
quarters state that the farmers who drive to market are considered and
treated in their parishes as aristocrats.  .  .  .  .  Each department
keeps to itself: they mutually repel each other."

[24] Buchez et Roux, XX., 409.  (Letter of Roland, Nov.  271 1792.)
"The circulation of grain has for a long time encountered the greatest
obstacles; scarcely a citizen now dares to do that business." - Ibid.,
417.  (Speech by Lequinio.) "The monopoly of wheat by land-owners and
farmers is almost universal.  Fright is the cause of it.  .  .  .
And where does this fear come from? From the general agitation, and
threats, with the bad treatment in many places of the farmers, land-
owners and traffickers in wheat known as bladiers." - Decrees of
Sep.16, 1792, and May 4, 1793.

[25] Buchez et Roux, XIX.  (Report by Cambon, Sep.22, 1792.) "The
taxes no longer reach the public treasury, because they are used for
purchasing grain in the departments." Ibid., XIX., 29.  (Speech by
Cambon, Oct.12, 1792.) "You can bear witness in your departments to
the sacrifices which well-to-do people have been obliged to make in
helping the poor class.  In many of the towns extra taxes have been
laid for the purchase of grain and for a thousand other helpful
measures."

[26] Buchez et Roux, XX., 409.  (Letter of Roland, Nov.29, 1792) -
XXI., 199.  (Deliberations of the provisional executive council, Sep.
3, 1792.) - Dauban, "La Demagogie en 1793," p.  64.  (Diary kept by
Beaulieu.) Ibid., 152.)

[27] Schmidt, I., 110-130.  - Decrees against the export of coin or
ingots, Sep.  5 and 15, 1792.-Decree on stocks or bonds payable to
bearer, Aug.14, 1792.

[28] We might today call this sentiment a desire to acquire and
retain.  (Sentiment of acquisiton).  (SR.)

[29] Taine's remark in a footnote.  (SR.)

[30] Archives Nationales, D., 55, I., file 2.  (Letter by Joifroy,
national agent in the district of Bar-sur-Aube, Germinal 5, year III.)
"Most of the farmers, to escape the requisition, have sold their
horses and replaced them with oxen." - Memoirs (in ms.) of M. Dufort
de Cheverney (communicated by M. Robert de Crévecur).  In June,
1793, "the requisitions fall like hail, every week, on wheat, hay,
straw, oats, etc.," all at prices fixed by the contractors, who make
deductions, postpone and pay with difficulty.  Then come requisitions
for hogs.  "This was depriving all the country folks of what they
lived on." As the requisitions called for live hogs, there was a hog
St.  Bartholomew.  Everybody killed his pig and salted it down."
(Environs of Blois.) In relation to refusing to gather in crops, see
further on.  - Dauban, "Paris in 1794, p.229.  (Ventose 24, general
orders by Henriot.) "Citizen Guillon being on duty outside the walls,
saw with sorrow that citizens were cutting their wheat to feed rabbits
with."

[31] Decree of Messidor 23, year II., on the consolidation with the
national domain of the assets and liabilities of hospitals and other
charitable institutions.  (See reports of prefets on the effect of
this law, on the ruin of the hospitals, on the misery of the sick, of
foundlings and the infirm, from years IX.  to XIII.) - Decrees of
August 8 and 12, 1793, and July 24, 1794, on academies and literary
societies.  - Decree of August 24, 1793, § 29, on the assets and
liabilities of communes.

[32] Schmidt, I., 144.  (Two billions September 27, 1793; one billion
four hundred millions June 19, 1794.) - Decree of August 24, September
13, 1793, on the conversion of title-deeds and the formation of the
Grand Ledger.  - Decrees of July 31, August 30 and September 5, on
calling in the assignats à face royale.  - Decrees of August 1 and
September 5, 1793, on the refusal to accept assignats at par.

[33] Archives Nationales, F.7, 4421.  (Documents on the revolutionary
taxes organized at Troyes, Brumaire 11, year II.) Three hundred and
seventy-three persons are taxed, especially manufacturers, merchants
and land-owners; the minimum of the tax is one hundred francs, the
maximum fifty thousand francs, the total being one million seven
hundred and sixty-two thousand seven hundred francs.  Seventy-six
petitions attached to the papers show exactly the situation of things
in relation to trade, manufactures and property, the state of fortunes
and credit of the upper and lower bourgeois class.

[34] Mallet-Dupan, "Mémoires," II., 17.  "I have seen the thirty-
second list of émigrés at Marseilles, merely of those whose
possessions have been confiscated and sold; there are twelve thousand
of them, and the lists were not finished." - Reports of préfets.  (Var
by Fanchet, year IX.) "The emigration of 1793 throws upon Leghorn and
the whole Italian coast a very large number of Marseilles and Toulon
traders.  These men, generally industrious, have established (there)
more than one hundred and sixty soap factories and opened a market for
the oil of this region.  This event may be likened to the Revocation
of the Edict of Nantes." - Cf.  the reports on the departments of the
Rhône, Aude, Lot and Garonne, Lower Pyrenees, Orme, etc.

[35] Archives des Affaires Étrangères, vol.  332.  (Letter of
Désgranges, Bordeaux, Brumaire 12, year II.) "Nobody here talks about
trade any more than if it had never existed."

[36] Dr. Jaïn, "Choix de documents et lettres privées trouvees dans
des papiers de famille," p.144.  (Letter of Gédëon Jaïn, banker at
Paris, November 18, 1793.) "Business carried on with difficulty and at
a great risk occasion frequent and serious losses, credit and
resources being almost nothing."

[37] Archives Nationales, F.7, 2475.  (Letters of Thullier, procureur-
syndic of the Paris department, September 7 and 10, 1793.  - Report by
a member of the Piques section, September 8 and 10, 1793.  - Cf.  the
petitions of traders and lawyers imprisoned at Troyes, Strasbourg,
Bordeaux, etc.  - Archives Nationales, AF.,II., 271.  Letter of
Francastel: "At least three thousand monopolist aristocrats have been
arrested at Nantes....  and this is not the last purification."

[38] Decrees of May 4, 15, 19, 20 and 23, and of August 30, 1793.  -
Decrees of July 26, August 15, September II, 1793, and February 24,
1794.  - Camille Boursier, "Essai sur la Terreur en Anjou," p.  254.
(Letter of Buissart to his friend Maximilian Robespierre, Arras,
Pluviose 14, year II.) "we are dying with starvation in the midst of
abundance; I think that the mercantile aristocracy ought to be killed
out like the nobles and priests.  The communes, with the help of a
storehouse of food and goods must alone be allowed to trade.  This
idea, well carried out, can be realized; then, the benefits of trade
will turn to the advantage of the Republic, that is to say, to the
advantage of buyer and seller."

[39] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 49.  (Documents on the levy of
revolutionary taxes, Belfort, Brumaire 30, year II.) " Verneur, sr.,
taxed at ten thousand livres, for having withheld goods deposited with
him by his sister, in order to save them from the coming taxation."
Campardon I., 292.  (Judgments of the revolutionary commission at
Strasbourg.) - "The head-clerk in Hecht's apothecary shop is accused
of selling two ounces of rhubarb and manna at fifty-four sous; Hecht,
the proprietor, is condemned to a fine of fifteen thousand livres.
Madeleine Meyer, at Rosheim, a retailer, is accused of selling a
candle for ten sous and is condemned to a fine of one thousand livres,
payable in three days.  Braun, butcher and bar-keeper, accused of
having sold a glass of wine for twenty sous, is condemned to a fine of
forty thousand francs, to be imprisoned until this is paid, and to
exposure in the pillory before his own house for four hours, with this
inscription: debaser of the national currency." - " Recueil de Pieces,
etc., at Strasbourg," (supplement, pp.  21, 30, 64).  "Marie Ursule
Schnellen and Marie Schultzmann, servant, accused of monopolising
milk.  The former is sentenced to the pillory for one day under a
placard, monopoliser of milk, and to hold in one hand the money and,
in the other, the milk-pot; the other, a servant with citizen Benner.
.  .  .  he, the said Benner, is sentenced to a fine of three hundred
livres, payable in three days." - " Dorothy Franz, convicted of having
sold two heads of salad at twenty sous, and of thus having depreciated
the value of assignats, is sentenced to a fine of three thousand
livres, imprisonment for six weeks and exposure in the pillory for two
hours." - Ibid., I., 18.  "A grocer, accused of having sold sugar-
candy at lower than the rate, although not comprised in the list, is
sentenced to one hundred thousand livres fine and imprisonment until
peace is declared." - Orders by Saint-Just and Lebas, Nivose 3, year
II.  "The criminal court of the department of the Lower-Rhine is
ordered to destroy the house of any one convicted of having made sales
below the rates fixed by the maximum," consequently, the house of one
Schauer, a furrier, is torn down, Nivose 7.

[40] Archives des Affaires Étrangères, vol.  322.  (Letter by Haupt,
Belfort, Brumaire 3, year II.) "On my arrival here, I found the law of
the maximum promulgated and in operation..  .  (but) the necessary
steps have not been taken to prevent a new monopoly by the country
people, who have flocked in to the shops of the dealers, carried off
all their goods and created a factitious dearth."

[41] Archives Nationales, F.7, 4421.  (Petitions of merchants and
shop-keepers at Troyes in relation to the revolutionary tax,
especially of hatters, linen, cotton and woollen manufacturers,
weavers and grocers.  There is generally a loss of one-half, and
sometimes of three-fourths of the purchase money.)

[42] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.330.  (Letter of Brutus,
Marseilles, Nivose 6, year II.) "Since the maximum everything is
wanting at Marseilles." - Ibid.  (Letter by Soligny and Gosse,
Thionville, Nivose 5, year II.) "No peasant is willing to bring
anything to market.  .  .  They go off six leagues to get a better
price and thus the communes which they once supplied are famishing ..
According as they are paid in specie or assignats the difference often
amounts to two hundred per cent., and nearly always to one hundred per
cent." - " Un Sejour en France," pp.  188-189.  - Archives Nationales,
D..  § I., file 2.  (Letter of Representative Albert, Germinal 19,
year II., and of Joffroy, national agent, district of Bar-sur-Aube,
Germinal 5, year III.  "The municipalities have always got themselves
exempted from the requisitions, which all fall on the farmers and
proprietors unable to satisfy them....  The allotment among the tax-
payers is made with the most revolting inequality....  Partiality
through connections of relatives and of friendship."

[43] Decrees of September 29, 1793 (articles 8 and 9); of May 4 and
20, and June 26, 1794.  - Archives Nationales, AF., II., 68-72.
(Orders of the Committee of Public Safety, Prairial 26, year II.) "The
horses and wagons of coal peddlers, the drivers accustomed to taking
to Paris by law a portion of the supply of coal used in baking in the
department of Seine-et-Marne, are drafted until the 1st of Brumaire
next, for the transportation of coal to Paris.  During this time they
cannot be drafted for any other service." (A good many orders in
relation to provisions and articles of prime necessity may be found in
these files, mostly in the handwriting of Robert Lindet.)

[44] Cf.  "The Revolution," II., 69.  - Dauban, "Paris en 1794."
(Report by Pouvoyeur, March 15, 1794.) "A report has been long
circulated that all the aged were to be slaughtered; there is not a
place where this falsehood is not uttered."

[45] Archives Nationales, F.7, 4435, file 10, letters of Collot
d'Herbois, Brumaire 17 and 19, year II.  - De Martel, "Fouché," 340,
341.  Letters of Collot d'Herbois, November 7 and 9, 1793.

[46] De Martel, ibid., 462.  (Proclamation by Javogues, Pluviose 13,
year II.)

[47] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  330.  (Letter of Brutus,
political agent, Nivôse 6.)

[48] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 116.  (Orders of Taillefer and
Marat-Valette, and Deliberations of the Directory of Lot, Brumaire 20,
year II.)

[49] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  331.  (Letter of the
agent Bertrand, Frimaire 3.)

[50] Ibid., vol.  1332.  (Letter of the agent Chépy, Brumaire 2.)

[51] Ibid., vol.1411.  (Letter of Blessmann and Hauser, Brumaire 30.)
- Ibid.  (Letter of Haupt, Belfort, Brumaire 29.) "I believe that
Marat's advice should be followed here and a hundred scaffolds be
erected; there are not guillotines enough to cut off the heads of the
monopolists.  I shall do what I can to have the pleasure of seeing one
of these damned bastards play hot cockles."

[52] Ibid., vol.333.  (Letter of Garrigues, Pluviôse 16.)

[53] "Souvenirs et Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," pp.83-85.  (June
and July, 1794.) - Ibid., at Nantes.  - Dauban, "Paris en 1794,"
p.194, March 4.

[54] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vols.  331 and 332.  (Letters
of Désgranges, Frimaire 3 and 8 and 10.) "Many of the peasants have
eaten no bread for a fortnight.  Most of them no longer work." Buchez
et Roux, XVIII., 346.  (Session of the convention, Brumaire 14, Speech
by Legendre.)

[55] Moniteur, xix., 671.  (Speech by Tallien, March 12, 1794.) Buchez
et Roux, XXXII., 423.  (Letter of Jullien, June 15, 1794.)

[56] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 111.  (Letters of Michaud,
Chateauroux, Pluviôse 18 and 19, year II.)

[57] Dauban, "Paris en 1794," 410, 492, 498.  (Letters frora the
national agent of the district of Sancoins, Thermidor 9, year II.;
from the Directory of Allier, Thermidor 9; from the national agent of
the district of Villefort, Thermidor 9.) - Gouverneur Morris, April
10, 1794, says in a letter to Washington that the famine in many
places is extremely severe.  Men really die of starvation who have the
means to buy bread if they could only get it.

[58] Volney, "Voyage en Orient," II., 344.  "When Constantinople lacks
food twenty provinces are starved for its supply."

[59] Archives Nationales, AF., II , 46, 68.  (Decree of committee of
Public Safety.) The Treasury pays over to the city of Paris for
subsistence, on Aug.  2, 1793, two millions, August 14, three, and
September 2nd, one million; September 8, 16, and 23, one million each,
and so on.  .  .  .  Between August 7, 1793 and Germinal '9, year II.,
the Treasury paid over to Paris, thirty one millions.

[60] Ibid, AF., II., 68.  Decrees of Brumaire 14, Nivôse 7 and
Germinal 22 on the departments assigned to the supply of Paris.
Buchez et Roux, XXVIII., 489.  (Speech by Danton in Jacobin club,
Aug.28, '793.) "I constantly asserted that it was necessary to give
all to the mayor of Paris if he exacted it to feed its inhabitants.  .
.  .  Let us sacrifice one hundred and ten millions and save Paris and
through it, the Republic."

[61] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vols.  1410 and 1411.  Reports
of June 20 and 21, 1793, July 21, 22, 28, 29 and 31, and every day of
the months of August and September, 1793.  Schmidt, "Tableaux de la
Revolution Française," vol.  II., passim - Dauban, "Paris in 1794,"
(especially throughout Ventôse, year II.).  - Archives Nationales,
F.7, 31167.  (Reports for Nivôse, year II.)

[62] Dauban, "Paris en 1794,".  (Report of Ventôse 2.)

[63] Mercier, "Paris Pendant la Revolution," I., 355.

[64] Archives des Affaires étrangères, 141 I.  (Reports of August 1
and 2, 1763.) "At one o'clock in the morning, we were surprised to
find men and women lying along the sides of the houses patiently
waiting for the shops to open." - Dauban, 231.  (Report of Ventôse
24.) To obtain the lights of a hog, at the slaughter house near the
Jardin des Plantes, at the rate of three francs ten sous, instead of
thirty sous as formerly, women "were lying on the ground with little
baskets by their side and waiting four and five hours."

[65] Archives Nationales, F.7, 31167.  (Reports of Nivôse 9 and 28.)
"The streets of Paris are always abominable; they are certainly afraid
to use those brooms." Dauban, 120.  (Ventôse 9.) "The rue St.  Anne is
blocked up with manure.  In that part of it near the Rue Louvois,
heaps of this stretch along the walls for the past fortnight."

[66] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.1411.  (Reports of August
9, 1793.) Mercier, I., 353.  - Dauban, 530.  (Reports of Fructidor 27,
year II.  "There are always great gatherings at the coal depots.  They
begin at midnight.  one, two o'clock in the morning.  Many of the
habitués take advantage of the obscurity and commit all sorts of
indecencies."

[67] Schmidt, "Tableaux de la Revolution Française," II., 155.
(Reports of Ventôse 25.) - Dauban, 188.  (Reports of Ventôse 19).  -
Ibid., (Reports of Ventôse 2.) Ibid., 126.  (Reports of Ventôse 10.) -
Archives Nationales, F.  7, 31167.  (Reports of Nivôse 28, year II.)
The women "denounce the butchers and pork sellers who pay no attention
to the maximum law, giving only the poorest meat to the poor." Ibid.,
(Reports of Nivôse 6.) "It is frightful to see what the butchers give
the people."

[68] Mercier, 363.  "The women struggled with all their might against
the men and contracted the habit of swearing.  The last on the row
knew how to worm themselves up to the head of it." Buchez et Roux,
XXVIII., 364.  ("Journal de la Montague," July 28, 1793.  "One citizen
was killed on Sunday, July 21, one of the Gravilliers (club) in trying
to hold on to a six pound loaf of bread which he had just secured for
himself and family.  Another had a cut on his arm the same day in the
Rue Froid-Manteau.  A pregnant woman was wounded and her child died in
her womb."

[69] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.1410.  (Reports of August 6
and 7, 1793.)

[70] Dauban, 144.  (Reports of Ventôse 19.)

[71] Dauban, 199.  (Reports of Ventôse 19.) - Dauban, "La Demagogie en
1793," p.  470.  "Scarcely had the peasants arrived when harpies in
women's clothes attacked them and carried off their goods....
Yesterday, a peasant was beaten for wanting to sell his food at the
'maximum' rate." (October 19, 1793.) - Dauban, "Paris en 1794," 144,
173, 199.  (Reports of Ventôse 13, 17 and 19.) - Archives des Affaires
étrangères, vol.  1410.  (Reports of June 26 and 27, 1793.) Wagons and
boats are pillaged for candles and soap.

[72] Dauban, 45.  (Reports of Pluviôse 17.) 222.  (Reports of Ventôse
23.) - 160.  (Reports of Ventôse 15.) - 340.  (Reports of Germinal
28.) - 87.  (Reports of Ventôse 5.)

[73] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 116.  (Order of Paganel, Castres,
Pluviôse 6 and 7, year II.  "The steps taken to obtain returns of food
have not fulfilled the object.  .  .  .  The statements made are
either false or inexact.") Cf., for details, the correspondence of the
other representatives on mission.  - Dauban," Paris en1794." 190.
(Speech by Fouquier-Tinville in the Convention, Ventôse 19.) "The
mayor of Pont St.  Maxence has dared to say that 'when Paris sends us
sugar we will then see about letting her have our eggs and butter.'"

[74] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.  1411.  (Reports of August
7 and 8, 1793.) "Seven thousand five hundred pounds of bread, about to
be taken out, have been stopped at the barriers." - Dauban, 45.
(Orders of the day.  Pluviôse 17.) Lamps are set up at all the posts,
"especially at la Greve and Passy, so as to light up the river and see
that no eatables pass outside." - Mercier, I., 355.  - Dauban, 181.
(Reports of Ventôse 18.) - 210.  (Reports of Ventôse 21.) - 190.
Speech by Fouquier, Ventôse 19.) "The butchers in Paris who cannot
sell above the maximum carry the meat they buy to the Sèvres butchers
and sell it at any price they please.  " - 257.  (Reports of Ventôse
27.) "You see, about ten o'clock in the evening, aristocrats and other
egoists coming to the dealers who supply Egalité's mansion (the Duke
of Orleans) and buy chickens and turkeys which they carefully conceal
under their overcoats."

[75] Dauban, 255.  (Orders of the day by Henriot, Ventôse 27.) "I have
to request my brethren in arms not to take any rations whatever.  This
little deprivation will silence the malevolent who seek every
opportunity to humble us." - Ibid.,359.  "On Floreal 29, between five
and six o'clock in the morning, a patrol of about fifteen men of the
Bonnet Rouge section, commanded by a sort of commissary, stop
subsistences on the Orleans road and take them to their section."

[76] Dauban, 341.  (Letter of the Commissioner on Subsistences,
Germinal 23.) "The supplies are stolen under the people's eyes, or
what they get is of inferior quality." The commissioner is surprised
to find that, having provided so much, so little reaches the
consumers.

[77] Archives des Affaires étrangères, vol.1411.  (Reports of August
11-12 and 31, and Sept.  1, 1793.) - Archives Nationales, F.  7,
31167.) (Reports of Nivôse 7 and 12, year II.)

[78] Dauban, "Paris en 1794, 60, 68, 69, 71, 82, 93, 216, 231.  -
Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris," 187, 190.  - Archives Nationales, F.  7,
31167.  (Report of Leharivel, Nivôse 7.) - The gunsmiths employed by
the government likewise state that they have for a long time had
nothing to eat but bread and cheese.

[79] Dauban, 231.  (Report of Perriére, Ventôse 24.) "Butter of which
they make a god."

[80] Ibid., 68.  (Report of Ventôse 2.)

[81] Archives Nationales, F.7, 31167.  (Report of Nivôse 28.) - Dauban,
144.  (Report of Nivôse 14.)

[82] Dauban, 81.  (Report of Latour-Lamontagne, Ventôse 4.)

[83] Souvenirs et Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," 83.  "Friday, June
15, 1794, a proclamation is made that all who have any provisions in
their houses, wheat, barley, rye, flour and even bread, must declare
them within twenty four hours under penalty of being regarded as an
enemy of the country and declared 'suspect,' put under arrest and
tried by the courts." - Schmidt, "Tableaux de la Revolution
Française," II..  214.  A seizure is made at Passy of two pigs and
forty pounds of butter, six bushels of beans, etc., in the domicile of
citizen Lucet who had laid in supplies for sixteen persons of his own
household.

[84] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 68.  Orders of the Committee of
Public Safety, Pluviôse 23, referring to the law of Brumaire 25,
forbidding the extraction of more than fifteen pounds of bran from a
quintal of flour.  Order directing the removal of bolters from
bakeries and mills; he who keeps or conceals these on his property
"shall be treated as 'suspect' and put under arrest until peace is
declared." - Berryat Saint Prix, 357, 362.  At Toulouse, three persons
are condemned to death for monopoly.  At Montpelier, a baker, two
dealers and a merchant are guillotined for having invoiced, concealed
and kept a certain quantity of gingerbread cakes intended solely for
consumption by anti-revolutionaries.

[85] "Un Séjour en France," (April 22, 1794).

[86] Ludovic Sciout, IV., 236.  (Proclamation of the representatives
on mission in Finisterre.) "Magistrates of the people tell all farmers
and owners of land that their crops belong to the nation and that they
are simply its depositaries." Archives Nationales, AF., II., 92.
(Orders by Bô, representative in Cautal, Pluviôse 8.) "Whereas, as all
citizens in a Republic form one family.  .  .  .  all those who refuse
to assist their brethren and neighbors under the specious pretext that
they have not sufficient supplies must be regarded as 'suspect '
citizens."

[87] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 68.  (Orders of the Committee of
Public Safety, Prairial 28.) The maximum price is fourteen francs the
quintal; after Messidor 30, it is not to be more than eleven francs.

[88] Ibid., AF., II., 116 and 106, orders of Paganel, Castres,
Pluviôse 6 and 7.  Orders of Dartigoyte, Floréal 23, 25, and 29.

[89] Ibid., AF., II., 147.  (Orders of Maignet, Avignon, Prairial 2.)

[90] Moniteur, XXIII., 397 (Speech by Dubois-Crancé, May 5, 1795.)
"The Committee on Commerce (and Supplies) had thirty-five thousand
employees in its service."

[91] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 68.  (Orders of the Committee of
Public Safety, Prairial 28.) Decret of Messidor 8, year II.  "All
kinds of grain and the hay of the present crop are required by the
government." A new estimate is made, each farmer being obliged to
state the amount of his crop; verification, confiscation in case of
inaccurate declarations, and orders to thrash out the sheaves.  -
Dauban, 490.  (Letter of the national agent of Villefort, Thermidor
19.) Calculations and the reasoning of farmers with a view to avoid
sowing and planting: "Not so much on account of the lack of hands as
not to ruin oneself by sowing and raising an expensive crop which,
they say, affords them small returns when they sell their grain at so
low a price." Archives Nationales, AF., II.  106.  (Letter of the
national agent in Gers and Haute-Garonne, Floréal 25.) "They say here,
that as soon as the crop is gathered, all the grain will be taken
away, without leaving anything to live on.  It is stated that all salt
provisions are going to be taken and the agriculturists reduced to the
horrors of a famine."

[92] Moniteur, XXII., 21.  (Speech by Lindet, September 7, 1794.) "We
have long feared that the ground would not be tilled, that the meadows
would be covered with cattle while the proprietors and farmers were
kept in prison." Archives Nationales, D., § I, No.  I.  (Letter from
the district of Bar-sur-Seine, Ventôse 14, year III.) "The 'maximum'
causes the concealment of grain.  The quit-claims ruined the consumers
and rendered them desperate.  How many wretches, indeed, have been
arrested, - ?attacked, confiscated, fined and ruined for having gone
off fifteen or twenty leagues to get grain with which to feed their
wives and children?"

[93] AF., II., 106.  (Circular by Dartigoyte, Floréal 25.) "You must
apply this rule, that is, make the municipal officers responsible for
the non cultivation of the soil." "If any citizen allows himself a
different kind of bread, other than that which all the cultivators and
laborers in the commune use, I shall have him brought before the
courts conjointly with the municipality as being the first culprit
guilty of having tolerated it.  .  .  Reduce, if necessary, three
fourths of the bread allowed to non laboring citizens because
muscadins and muscadines: have resources and, besides, lead an idle
life."

[94] AF., II., III.  (Letters of Ferry, Bourges, Messidor 23, to his
"brethren in the popular club," and "to the citoyennes (women) of
Indre-et-Cher.")

[95] Moniteur, XXI., 171.  (Letter from Avignon, Messidor 9, and
letter of the Jacobins of Arles.

[96] Moniteur, XXI., 184.  (Decree of Messidor 21.)

[97] Gouverneur Morris.  (correspondence with Washington.  Letters of
March 27 and April 10, 1794.) He says that there is no record of such
an early spring.  Rye has headed out and clover is in flower.  It is
astonishing to see apricots in April as large as pigeons' eggs.  In
the south, where the dearth is most severe, he has good reason to
believe that the ground is supplying the inhabitants with food.  A
frost like that of the year before in the month of May (1793) would
help the famine more than all the armies and fleets in Europe.

[98] Stalin was to test the system and prove Taine right.  (SR.)

[99] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 73.  (Letter by the Directory of
Calvados, Prairial 26, year III.) "We have not a grain of wheat in
store, and the prisons are full of cultivators." Archives Nationales,
D., § 1, file No.3.  (Warrants of arrest issued by Representative
Albert, Pluviôse 19, year III., Germinal 7 and 16.) On the details of
the difficulties and annoyances attending the requisitions, cf.  this
file and the five preceding or following files.  (Letter of the
National agent, district of Nogent-sur-Seine, Germinal 13.) "I have
had summoned before the district court a great many cultivators and
proprietors who are in arrears in furnishing the requisitions made on
them by their respective municipalities.  .  .  .  A large majority
declared that they were unable to furnish in full even if their seed
were taken.  The court ordered the confiscation of the said grain with
a fine equal to the value of the quantity demanded of those called
upon .  .  It is now my duty to execute the sentence.  But, I must
observe to you, that if you do not reduce the fine, many of them will
be reduced to despair.  Hence I await your answer so that I may act
accordingly." (Another letter from the same agent, Germinal 9.) "It is
impossible to supply the market of Villarceaux; seven communes under
requisition prevented it through the district of Sozannes which
constantly keeps an armed force there to carry grain away as soon as
thrashed." - It is interesting to remark the inquisitorial
sentimentality of the official agents and the low stage of culture.
(Proces verbal of the Magincourt municipality, Ventôse 7.) Of course I
am obliged to correct the spelling so as to render it intelligible.
The said Croiset, gendarme, went with the national agent into the
houses of citizens in arrears, of whom, amongst those in arrears,
nobody refused but Jean Mauchin, whom we could not keep from talking
against him, seeing that he is wholly egoist and only wants for
himself.  He declared to us that, if, the day before his harvesting he
had any left, he would share it with the citizens that needed it.  .
.  .  Alas, yes, how could one refrain from shutting up such an egoist
who wants only for himself to the detriment of his fellow citizens? A
proof of the truth is that he feeds in his house three dogs, at least
one hundred and fifty chickens and even pigeons, which uses up a lot
of grain, enough to hinder the satisfaction of all the requisitions.
He might do without dogs, as his court is enclosed he might likewise
content himself with thirty chickens and then be able to satisfy the
requisitions." This document is signed "Bertrand, Agen." - Mauchin, on
the strength of it, is incarcerated at Troyes "at his own expense."

[100] Ibid.  Letter from the district of Bar sur Seine, Ventôse 14,
year III.  Since the abolition of the "maximum," "the inhabitants
travel thirty and forty leagues to purchase wheat." (Letter from the
municipality of Troyes, Ventôse 15.) "According to the price of grain,
which we keep on buying, by agreement, bread will cost fifteen sous
(the pound) next decade."

[101] Schmidt, "Pariser Zustände," 145-220.  The re-opening of the
Bourse, April 25, 1795; ibid., 322, II., 105.  - " Memoirs of Theobald
Wolf," vol.  I., p.200, (February 3, 1796).  At Havre, the louis d'or
is then worth five thousand francs, and the ecu of six francs in
proportion.  At Paris (February 12), the louis d'or is worth six
thousand five hundred; a dinner for two persons at the Palais Royal
costs one thousand five hundred francs.  - Mayer, ("Frankreich in
1796.") He gives a dinner for ten persons which costs three hundred
thousand francs in assignats.  At this rate a cab ride costs one
thousand francs, and by the hour six thousand francs.

[102] "Correspondance de Mallet du Pan avec la cour de Vienne," I.,
253 (July 18, 1795).  "It is not the same now as in the early days of
the Revolution, which then bore heavily only on certain classes of
society; now, everybody feels the scourge, hourly, in every department
of civil life.  Goods and provisions advance daily (in price) in much
greater proportion than the decline in assignats.  .  .  .  Paris is
really a city of furnishing shops.  .  .  The immense competition for
these objects raises all goods twenty five per cent.  a week....  It
is the same with provisions.  A sack of wheat weighing three quintals
is now worth nine thousand francs, a pound of beef thirty six francs,
a pair of shoes one hundred francs.  It is impossible for artisans to
raise their wages proportionately with such a large and rapid
increase." - Cf.  "Diary of Lord Malmesbury," III., 290 (October 27,
1796).  After 1795, the gains of the peasants, land owners and
producers are very large; from 1792 to 1796 they accumulate and hide
away most of the current coin.  They were courageous enough and smart
enough to protect their hoard against the violence of the
revolutionary government; "hence, at the time of the depreciation of
assignats, they bought land extraordinarily cheap." In 1796 they
cultivate and produce a great deal.

[103] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 72.  (Letter of the
administrators of the district of Montpelier to the Convention,
Messidor 26, year II.) " Your decree of Nivôse 4 last, suppressed the
'maximum,' which step, provoked by justice and the 'maximum,' did not
have the effect you anticipated." The dearth ceases, but there is a
prodigious increase in prices, the farmer selling his wheat at from
four hundred and seventy to six hundred and seventy francs the
quintal.

[104] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 71.  (Deliberations of the
commune of Champs, canton of Lagny, Prairial 22, year III.  Letter of
the procureur-syndic of Meaux, Messidor 3.  Letter of the municipality
of Rozoy, Seine et Marne, Messidor 4.) - Ibid., AF., II., 74.  (Letter
of the municipality of Emérainville, endorsed by the Directory of
Meaux, Messidor 14.) "The commune can procure only oat-bread for its
inhabitants, and, again, they have to go a long way to get this.  This
food, of so poor a quality, far from strengthening the citizen
accustomed to agricultural labor, disheartens him and makes him ill,
the result being that the hay cannot be got in good time for lack
of hands." - At Champs, "the crop of hay is ready for mowing, but, for
want of food, the laborers cannot do the work."

[105] Ibid., AF., II., 73.  (Letter from the Directory of the district
of Dieppe, Prairial 22.)

[106] Ibid.  (Letter of the administrators of the district of
Louviers, Prairial 26.)

[107] Ibid.  (Letter of the procureur-syndic of the Caen district,
Caen, Messidor 23.  - Letter of Representative Porcher to the
Committee of Public Safety, Messidor 26. - Letter of the same,
Prairial 24.  "The condition of this department seemed to me
frightful.  .  .  .  The privations of the department with respect to
subsistence cannot be over-stated to you; the evil is at its height."

[108] Archives Nationales, AF.  II., 74.  (Letter of the Beauvais
administrators, Prairial 15.  - Letter of the Bapaume administrator,
Prairial 24.  - Letter of the Vervier administrator, Messidor 7.  -
Letter of the commissary sent by the district of Laon, Messidor.) -
Cf., I6id., letter from the Abbeville district, Prairial 11.  "The
quintal of wheat is sold at one thousand assignats, or rather, the
farmers will not take assignats any more, grain not to be had for
anything but coin, and, as most people have none to give they are
hard-hearted enough to demand of one his clothes, and of another his
furniture, etc."

[109] Ibid., AF., II., 71.  (Letter of the Rozoy municipality.  Seine-
et-Marne, Messidor 4, year III.) A bushel of wheat in the vicinity of
Rozoy brings three hundred francs.

[110] Ibid., AF., II., 74.  (Letter of the Montreuil-sur-Mer
municipality, Prairial 29.)

[111] Ibid.  (Letter of the Vervins administrators, Prairial 11 Letter
of the commune of La Chapelle-sur-Somme, Prairial 24.)

[112] Ibid., AF., II., 70.  (Letter of the procureur-syndic of the
district of Saint-Germain, Thermidor 10.) This file, which depicts the
situation of the communes around Paris, is specially heartrending and
terrible.  Among other instances of the misery of workmen the
following petition of the men employed on the Marly water-works may be
given, Messidor 28.  "The workmen and employees on the machine at
Marly beg leave to present to you the wretched state to which they are
reduced by the dearness of provisions.  Their moderate wages, which at
the most have reached only five livres twelve sous, and again, for
four months past, having received but two francs sixteen sous, no
longer provide them with half a pound of bread, since it costs fifteen
and sixteen francs per pound.  We poor people have not been wanting in
courage nor patience, hoping that times would mend.  We have been
reduced to selling most of our effects and to eating bread made of
bran of which a sample is herewith sent, and which distresses us very
much (nous incommode beaucoup); most of us are ill and those who are
not so are in a very feeble state." - Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris,"
Thermidor 9.  "Peasants on the market square complain bitterly of
being robbed in the fields and on the road, and even of having their
sacks (of grain) plundered."

[113] Archives Nationales, D., § I, file 2.  (Letter of the Ervy
municipality, Floréal 17, year III.) "The indifference of the egoist
farmers in the country is at its height; they pay no respect whatever
to the laws, killing the poor by refusing to sell, or unwilling to
sell their grain at a price they can pay." - (It would be necessary to
copy the whole of this file to show the alimentary state of the
departments.)

[114] Ibid., AF., II., 74.  (Letter of the district administrators of
Bapaume, Prairial 24.  - Letter of the municipality of Boulogne-sur-
Mer, Prairial 24.)

[115] Ibid.,, AF., II., 73.  (Letter of the municipality of Brionne,
district of Bernay, Prairial 7.) The farmers do not bring in their
wheat because they sell it elsewhere at the rate of fifteen hundred
and two thousand francs the sack of three hundred and thirty pounds.

[116] Ibid., AF., II., 71.  (Letter of the procureur-syndic of the
district of Meaux, Messidor 2.) "Their fate is shared by many of the
rural communes" and the whole district has been reduced to this dearth
"to increase the resources of Paris and the armies."

[117] Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris." (Reports of the Police, Pluviôse
6, year III.) - Ibid., Germinal 16.  "A letter from the department of
Drome states that they are dying of hunger there, bread selling at
three francs the pound."

[118] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 70.  (Deliberations of the
council-general of Franciade, Thermidor 9, year III.)

[119] Ibid.  (Letter of the procureur-syndic of the district of Saint-
Germain, Thermidor 10.) - Delécluze, "Souvenirs de Soixante Années,"
p.  10.  (The Delécluze family live in Mendon in 1794 and for most of
1795.  M. Delécluze, senior, and his son go to Meaux and obtain of a
farmer a bag of good flour weighing three hundred and twenty five
pounds for about ten louis d'or and fetch it home, taking the greatest
pains to keep it concealed.  Both father and son "after having covered
the precious sack with hay and straw in the bottom of the cart, follow
it on foot at some distance as the peasant drives along." Madame
Delécluze kneads the bread herself and bakes it.

[120] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 74.  The following shows some of
the municipal expenditures.  (Deliberations of the commune of Annecy,
Thermidor 8, year II I.) "Amount received by the commune from the
government, 1,200,000 francs.  Fraternal subscriptions, 400,000
francs.  Forced loan, 2,400,000 francs.  Amount arising from grain
granted by the government, but not paid for, 400,000 francs." (Letter
from the municipality of Lille, Fructidor 7 ) "The deficit, at the
time we took hold of the government, which, owing to the difference
between the price of grain bought and the price obtained for bread
distributed among the necessitous, had amounted to 2,270,023 francs,
so increased in Thermidor as to amount to 8,312,956 francs."
consequently, the towns ruin themselves with indebtedness to an
incredible extent.  - Archives Nationales, AF., II., 72.  (Letter of
the municipality of Tours, Vendémiaire 19, year IV.) Tours has not
sufficient money with which to buy oil for its street lamps and which
are no longer lit at night.  A decree is passed to enable the agent
for provisions at Paris to supply its commissaries with twenty
quintals of oil which, for three hundred and forty lamps, keeps one
hundred agoing up to Germinal 1.  The same at Toulouse.  (Report of
Destrene, Moniteur, June 24, 1798.) On November 26, 1794, Bordeaux is
unable to pay seventy two francs for thirty barrels of water to wash
the guillotine.  (Granier de Cassagnac, I., 13.  Extract from the
archives of Bordeaux.) Bordeaux is authorized to sell one thousand
casks of wine which had formerly been taken on requisition by the
government, the town to pay for them at the rate at which the Republic
bought them and to sell them as dear as possible in the way of regular
trade.  The proceeds are to be employed in providing subsistence for
its inhabitants.  (Archives Nationales, AF., II., 72, orders of
Vendémiaire 4, year IV.) As to aid furnished by the assignats granted
to towns and departments cf.  the same files; 400,000 francs to
Poitiers, Pluviôse 18, four millions to Lyons, Pluviôse 17, three
millions a month to Nantes, after Thermidor 14, ten millions to the
department of Herault in Frimaire and Pluviôse , etc.

[121] Archives Nationales, II., § 1, file 2.  (Deliberations of the
commune of Troyes, Ventôse 15, year III.) - "Un Sejour en France."
(Amiens, May 9, 1795.) "As we had obtained a few six franc crowns and
were able to get a small supply of wheat.  .  .  .  Mr.  D  and the
servants eat bread made of three fourths bran and one fourth flour.
When we bake it we carefully close the doors, paying no attention to
the door bell, and allow no visitor to come in until every trace of
the operation is gone.  .  .  The distribution now consists of a
mixture of sprouted wheat, peas, rye, etc., which scarcely resembles
bread." (April 12.) "The distribution of bread (then) was a quarter of
a pound a day.  Many of those who in other respects were well off, got
nothing at all."

[122] Ibid.  (Letters of the municipality of Troyes, Ventôse 15, year
III., and Germinal 6.) Letter of the three deputies, sent by the
municipality to Paris, Pluviôse , year III.  (no date.)

[123] "Un Sejour en France." (Amiens, Jan.  30, 1795.) Archives
Nationales.  AF.,II., 74.  (Deliberation of the commune of Amiens,
Thermidor 8, and Fructidor 7, year III.)

[124] "Souvenirs et Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," p.  97.  (The
women stop carts loaded with wheat, keep them all night, stone and
wound Representative Bernier, and succeed in getting, each, eight
pounds of wheat.)

[125] Archives Nationales, AF.,II., 73.  (Letter of the municipality
of Dieppe, Prairial 22.) - AF.,II., 74.  (Letter of the municipality
of Vervins, Messidor 7.  Letter of the municipality of Lille,
Fructidor 7.)

[126] "Correspondance de Mallet du Pan avec la Cour de Vienne," I.,
90.  Ibid., 131.  One month later a quintal of flour at Lyons is worth
two hundred francs and a pound of bread forty-five sous.

[127] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 13.  (Letter of the deputies
extraordinary of the three administrative bodies of Chartres,
Thermidor 15: "In the name of this commune dying of hunger ") - "The
inhabitants of Chartres have not even been allowed to receive their
rents in grain; all has been poured into the government storehouses."

[128] Ibid.  (Petition of the commune of La Rochelle, Fructidor 25,
that of Painbuf, Fructidor 9, that of the municipality of Nantes,
Thermidor 14, that of Rouen, Fructidor 1.) - Ibid., AF.,II, 72.
(Letter of the commune of Bayonne, Fructidor 1.) "Penury of provisions
for more than two years.  .  .  .  The municipality, the past six
months, is under the cruel necessity of reducing its subjects to half-
a-pound of corn-bread per day.  .  .  .  at the rate of twenty-five
sous the pound, although the pound costs over five francs." After the
suppression of the "maximum " it loses about twenty-five thousand
francs per day.

[129] Ibid.  (Letter of Representative Porcher, Caen, Prairial 24,
Messidor 3 and 26.  Letter of the municipality of Caen, Messidor 3.)

[130] Ibid.  AF.,II., 71.  (Letter of the municipality of Auxerre,
Messidor 19.) "We have kept alive thus far through all sorts of
expedients as if by miracle.  It has required incalculable efforts,
great expenditure, and really supernatural means to accomplish it.
But there is still one month between this and the end of Thermidor.
How are we going to live! Our people, the majority of whom are farmers
and artisans, are rationed at half-a-pound a day for each person and
this will last but ten or twelve days at most."

[131] Meissner, "Voyage à Paris," 339.  "There was not a morsel of
bread in our inn.  I went myself to five or six bakeries and pastry
shops and found them all stripped." He finds in the last one about a
dozen of small Savoy biscuits for which he pays fifteen francs.  -
See, for the military proceedings of the government in relation to
bread, the orders of the Committee of Public Safety, most of them by
the hand of Lindet, AF., II., 68-74.

[132] Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris," vols.  II.  and III .,passim.

[133] Archives Nationales, AF.,II., 68.  (Orders of Ventôse 20, year
III.  ; Germinal 19 and 20; Messidor 8, etc.)

[134] ibid.  Orders of Nivôse 5 and 22.

[135] Ibid.  Orders of Pluviôse 19, Ventôse 5, Floréal 4 and 24.  (The
fourteen brewers which the Republic keeps agoing for itself at Dunkirk
are excepted.) - The proceedings are the same in relation to other
necessary articles, - returns demanded of nuts, rape-seed, and other
seeds or fruits producing oil, also the hoofs of cattle and sheep,
with requisitions for every other article entering into the
manufacture of oil, and orders to keep oil-mills agoing.  "All
administrative bodies will see that the butchers remove the fat from
their meat before offering it for sale, that they do not themselves
make candles out of it, and that they do not sell it to soap-
factories, etc.  " - (Orders of Veridémiaire 28, year III.)  The
executive committee will collect eight hundred yoke of oxen and
distribute them among the dealers in hay in order to transport wood
and coal from the woods and collieries to the yards.  They will
distribute proportionately eight hundred sets of wheels and harness.
The wagoners will be paid and guarded the same as military convoys,
and drafted as required.  To feed the oxen, the district
administrators will take by pre-emption the necessary fields and
pasturages, etc." (Orders of Pluviôse 10, year III.)

[136] Moniteur, XXIV., 397.  - Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris." (Reports
of Frimaire 16, year IV.) "Citizens in the departments wonder how it
is that Paris costs them five hundred and forty six millions per month
merely for bread when they are starving.  This isolation of Paris, for
which all the benefits of the Revolution are exclusively reserved.
has the worst effect on the public mind." - Meissner, 345.

[137] Mercier, "Paris Pendant la Révolution," I., 355-357.  - Schmidt,
"Pariser Zustande," I., 224.  (The Seine is frozen over on November 23
and January 23, the thermometer standing at sixteen degrees
(Centigrade) below zero.) - Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris." (Reports of
the Police, Pluviôse 2, 3 and 4.)

[138] Schmidt, "Pariser Zustande," I., 228, and following pages.
(February 25, the distribution of bread is reduced to one and one-half
pounds per person; March 17, to one and onehalf pounds for workmen and
one pound for others.  Final reduction to one-quarter of a pound,
March 31.) - Ibid., 251, for ulterior rates.  - Dufort de Cheverney,
(MS.  Mémoires, August, 1795.) M. de Cheverney takes up his quarters
at the old Louvre with his friend Sedaine.  "I had assisted them with
food all I could: they owned to me that, without this, they would have
died of starvation notwithstanding their means."

[139] Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris." (Reports of Germinal 15 and 27,
and Messidor 28, year III., Brumaire 14 and Frimaire 23, year IV.) -
Ibid.  (Germinal 15, year III.) Butter is at eight francs the pound,
eggs seven francs for four ounces.  - Ibid., (Messidor 19) bread is at
sixteen francs the pound, (Messidor 28) butter at fourteen francs the
pound, (Brumaire 29) flour at 14,000 francs the bag of 325 pounds.

[140] Ibid.  (Report of Germinal 12, year III.) "The eating houses and
pastry-cooks are better supplied than ever." ?"Memoires (manuscript)
of M. de Cheverney." "My sister-in-law, with more than forty thousand
livres income, registered in the 'Grand Ledger,' was reduced to
cultivating her garden, assisted by her two chambermaids.  M. de
Richebourg, formerly intendant-general of the Post-Office, had to sell
at one time a clock and at another time a wardrobe to live on.  'My
friends,' he said to us one day, 'I have been obliged to put my clock
in the pot.' " - Schmidt.  (Report of Frimaire 17, year IV.) "A
frequenter of the Stock-Exchange sells a louis at five thousand
francs.  He dines for one thousand francs and loudly exclaims: 'I have
dined at four francs ten sous.  They are really superb, these
assignats! I couldn't have dined so well formerly at twelve francs.'"

[141] Schmidt.  (Reports of Frimaire 9, year IV.) "The reports
describe the sad condition of those who, with small incomes and having
sold their clothes, are selling their furniture, being, so to say, at
their last piece; and, soon without anything, are reduced to the last
extremity by committing suicide." - Ibid., Frimaire 2, "The rentier is
ruined, not being able to buy food.  Employees are all in the same
situation." - Naturally, the condition of employees and rentiters
grows worse with the depreciation of assignats.  Here are house-
keeping accounts at the end of 1795.  (Letter of Beaumarchais' sister
Julie to his wife, December, 1794.  "Beaumarchais et son temps," by De
Lomenie, p.486.) "When you gave me those four thousand francs
(assignats), my dear friend, my heart went pit-a-pat.  I thought that
I should go crazy with such a fortune.  I put them in my pocket at
once and talked about other things so as to get the idea out of my
mind.  On returning to the house, get some wood and provisions as
quick as possible before prices go higher! Dupont (the old domestic)
started off and did his best.  But the scales fell from my eyes on
seeing, not counting food for a month, the result of those 4,275
francs:

     1 load of wood                                       1460 francs
     9 pounds of candles, from 8 to 100 francs per pound   900
     4 pounds of sugar, at 100 francs per pound            400
     3 measures of grain, at 40 francs                     120
     7 pounds oil, at 100 francs                           700
     12 wicks, at 5 francs                                  60
     1 1/2 bushels potatoes, at 200 francs per bushel      300
     1 month's washing                                     215
     1 pound ground powder                                  70
     2 ounces pomatum (formerly 3 sous, now 25 francs)      50
Sub-total                                                    4,275 francs

There remains the month's supply of butter and eggs,
 as you know, 200 francs, meat 25 or 30 francs, and
other articles in proportion                               507

There was no bread for two days. . . I have bought only
four pounds the last two days, at 45 francs                180

Total                                                    5,022 francs.

"When I think of this royal outlay, as you call it, which makes me
spend from18,000 to 20,000 francs for nothing, I wish the devil had
the system...  .  10,000 francs which I have scattered about the past
fortnight, alarm and trouble me so much that I do not know how to
calculate my income in this way.  In three days the difference (in the
value of assignats) has sent wood up from 4,200 to 6,500 francs, and
extras in proportion so that, as I wrote you, a load piled up and put
away costs me 7,100 francs.  Every week now, the pot-au-feu and other
meats for ragouts, without any butter, eggs and other details, cost
from seven to eight hundred francs.  Washing also goes up so fast that
eight thousand francs do not suffice.  All this puts me out of humor,
while in all this expenditure I declare on my honor (je jure par la
saine vérité de mon cur) that for two years I have indulged no fancy
of my own or spent anything except on household expenses.
Nevertheless, I have urgent need of some things for which I should
require piles of assignats." - We see by Beaumarchais' correspondence
that one of his friends travels around in the environs of Paris to
find bread.  "It is said here (he writes from Soizy, June 5, 1795)
that flour may be had at Briare.  If this were so I would bargain with
a reliable man there to carry it to you by water-carriage between
Briare and Paris.  .  .  In the mean time I do not despair of finding
a loaf." - Letter of a friend of Beaumarchais: "This letter costs you
at least one hundred francs, including paper, pen, ink, and lamp-oil.
For economy's sake I write it in your house."

[142] Cf.  Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris," vols.  II.  and III.
(Reports of the Police, at the dates designated.)

[143] Dauban, "Paris en 1794," pp.562, 568, 572.

[144] Mallet-Dupan, "Correspondance avec la cour de Vienne," I., 254.
(July 18, 1795.)

[145] Schmidt, ibid.  (Report of Fructidor 3, year III.)

[146] Schmidt, ibid., vols.  II.  and III.  (Reports of the police at
the dates designated.)

[147] Meissner, " Voyage à Paris," 132.  Ibid., 104.  " Bread is made
with coarse, sticky black flour, because they put in potatoes, beans,
Indian corn and millet, and moreover it is badly baked." - Granier de
Cassagnac, "Histoire du Directoire," I., 51.  (Letter of M. Andot to
the author.) "There were three-quarter pound days, one-half pound and
one-quarter pound days and many at two ounces.  I was achild of twelve
and used to go and wait four hours in the morning in a line, rue de
l'Ancienne Comédie.  There was a fourth part of bran in the bread,
which was very tender and very soft.  .  .  .  and it contained one-
fourth excess of water.  I brought back eight ounces of bread a day
for the four persons in our household."

[148] Dauban, 586.

[149] Schmidt, ibid.  (Reports of Brumaire 24, and Frimaire 13, year
IV.)

[150] This state of misery is prolonged far beyond this epoch in Paris
and the provinces.  ~f.  Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris," vol.  III.-
Felix Rocquam, "L'Etat de la France au 18e Brumaire," p.156.  (Report
by Fourcroy, Nivôse 5, year IX.) Convoys of grain fail to reach Brest
because the English are masters at sea, while the roads on land are
impassable.  "we are assured that the people of Brest have long been
on half-rations and perhaps on quarter-rations."

[151] 1st It is difficult to arrive at even approximate figures, but
the following statements will render the idea clear.  I.  Wherever I
have compared the mortality of the Revolution with that of the ancient
regime I have found the former greater than the latter, even in those
parts of France not devastated by the civil war; and the increase of
this mortality is enormous, especially in years II.  and III.  - At
Troyes, with 25,282 inhabitants (in 1790), during the five years of
1786, 1787, 1788, 1789 and 1792 (1790 and 1791 are missing), the
average annual mortality is 991 deaths, or 39 per thousand
inhabitants; during the years II, III, IV, this average is 1,166 or 47
per thousand inhabitants; the increase is then 7 deaths per year,
nearly one fifth.  (Documents provided by M. Albert Babeau.) - At
Rheims, the average mortality from 1780 to 1789 is 1,350, which, for a
population of 35,597, (1790), gives 41 deaths per annum to every
thousand inhabitants.  In the year II., there are 1,836 deaths which
gives for each of the two years 64 deaths to every thousand persons;
the increase is 23 deaths a year, that is to say more than one-half
above the ordinary rate.  (Statistics communicated by M. Jadart,
archiviste at Rheims.) - At Limoges, the yearly average of mortality
previous to 1789 was 825 to 20,000 inhabitants, or at the rate of 41
to a thousand.  From January 1, 1792, to September 22, 1794, there are
3,449 deaths, that is to say, a yearly average of 63 deaths to one
thousand inhabitants, that is to say, 22 extra per annum, while the
mortality bears mostly on the poor, for out of 2,073 persons who die
between January 17, 1793, and September 22, 1794, over one-half,
1,100, die in the hospital.  - (Louis Guibert, "Ancien registre des
paroisses de Limoges," pp.  40, 45, 47.) - At Poitiers, in year IX.,
the population is 18,223, and the average mortality of the past ten
years was 724 per annum.  But in year II., there are 2,094 deaths, and
in year III.  2,032, largely in the hospitals.  Thus, even on
comparing the average mortality of the ten years of the Revolution
with the mortality of years II.  and III., the average rate has almost
trebled.  - The same applies to Loudens, where the average death-rate
being 151, in year II., it rises to 425.  Instead of the triple for
Chatellerault, it is double, where, the average rate being 262, the
death-rate rises to 482, principally in the military hospitals.
("Statistique de la Vienne," by Cochon, préfet, year IX.) - At Niort,
population 11,000, the annual mortality of the ten years preceding
1793 averaged 423, or 38 per thousand.  In year II., there are 1,872,
or 170 per thousand inhabitants, the number being more than
quadrupled.  In year III., there are 1,122 deaths, or 122, which is
almost the triple.  ('Statistique des Deux-Sèvres," by Dupin, prefet,
2nd memorial, year IX.) - At Strasbourg, ("Recueil des Pièces
Authentiques," etc., vol.  I., p.32, declaration of the Municipality,)
"twice as many died last year (year II.) as during any of the
preceding years." - According to these figures and the details we have
read, the annual mortality during years II.  and III.  and most of
year IV., may be estimated as having increased one-half extra.  Now,
previous to 1789, according to Moheau and Necker, (Peuchet,
"Statistique elementaire de la France," 1805, p.239,) the yearly
mortality in France was one person to every thirty, that is to say,
866,666 deaths to a population of 26 millions.  One-half in addition
to this for two and a half years gives, consequently, one million and
eighty thousand deaths.

 2nd .  During the whole of the Directory episode, privation lasted
and the rate of mortality rose very high, especially for sick
children, the infirm and the aged, because the convention had
confiscated the possessions of the hospitals and public charity was
almost null.  For example, at Lyons, "The Asylums having been deprived
of sisters of charity during years II., III.  and IV., and most of
year V., the children gathered into them could neither be fed nor
suckled and the number that perished was frightful." ("Statistique du
Rhone," by Vernier, prefet, year X.) - In Necker's time, there were
about eight hundred asylums, hospitals and charitable institutions,
with one hundred thousand or one hundred and ten thousand inmates.
(Peuchet, ibid., 256.) For lack of care and food they die in myriads,
especially foundlings, the number of which increases enormously: in
1790, the figures do not exceed 23,000; in year IX., the number
surpasses 62,000, (Peuchet, 260): "It is a 'perfect deluge,' " say the
reports; in the department of Aisne, there are 1,097 instead of 400;
in that of Lot-et-Garonne, fifteen hundred, (Statistiques des préfets
de l'Aisne, Gers, Lot-et-Garonne), and they are born only to die.  In
that of Eure, after a few months, it is six out of seven; at Lyons,
792 out of 820; (Statistique des Prefets du Rhone et de l'Eure).  At
Marseilles, it is ´600 out of 618; at Toulon, 101 out of 104; in the
average, 19 out of 20.  (Rocquam, "Etat de France au 18e Brumaire,"
p.33.  Report of François de Nantes.) At Troyes, out of 164 brought in
in year IV., 134 die; out of 147 received in year VII., 136 die.
(Albert Babeau, II., 452.) At Paris, in year IV., out of 3,122 infants
received 2,907 perish.  (Moniteur, year V., No.  231.) - The sick
perish the same.  "At Toulon, only seven pounds of meat are given each
day to eighty patients; I saw in the civil Asylum," says François de
Nantes, "a woman who had just undergone a surgical operation to whom
they gave for a restorative a dozen beans on a wooden platter."
(Ibid., 16, 31, and passim, especially for Bordeaux, Caen, Alençon,
St.  Lô, etc.) - As to beggars, these are innumerable: in year IX., it
is estimated that there are 3 or 4,000 by department, at least 300,000
in France.  "In the four Brittany departments one can truly say that a
third of the population live at the expense of the other two-thirds,
either by stealing from them or through compelling assistance."
(Rocquain, "Report by Barbé-Marbois," p.93.)

3rd.  In year IX., the Consells-generaux are called upon to ascertain
whether the departments have increased or diminished in population
since 1789.  ("Analyse des procés-verbaux des Conseils-Generaux de
l'an XI." In four volumes.) Out of 58 which reply, 37 state that the
population with them has diminished; 12, that it has increased; 9,
that it remains stationary.  Of the 22 others, 13 attribute the
maintenance or increase of population, at least for the most part, to
the multiplication of early marriages in order to avoid conscription
and to the large number of natural children.  - Consequently, the
average rate of population is kept up not through preserving life, but
through the substitution of new lives for the old ones that are
sacrificed.  Bordeaux, nevertheless, lost one-tenth of its population,
Angers one-eighth, Pau one-seventh, Chambery one-fourth, Rennes one-
third.  In the departments where the civil-war was carried on,
Argenton-Château lost two-thirds of its population, Bressuire fell
from 3,000 to 630 inhabitants; Lyons, after the siege, fell from a
population of 140,000 thousand to 80,000.  ("Analyse des procés-
verbaux des Conseils-Generaux" and Statistiques des Prefets.")

[152] Lareveillère-Lepeaux, "Mémoires.  " I, 248.  (He belongs to the
Committee and is an eye-witness.)



BOOK FIFTH.    The End of the Revolutionary Government.

CHAPTER I.

I.    The Convention.

The Convention after Thermidor 9.  - Reaction against the Terrorists.
- Aversion to the Constitutionalists.  - The danger they run if they
lose power.

Nevertheless they too, these glutted sovereigns, are anxious, and very
much so, we have just seen why; it's a question of remaining in office
in order to remain alive, and henceforth this is their sole concern.
- A good Jacobin, up to the 9th of Thermidor, could, by shutting his
eyes, still believe in his creed.[1] After the 9th of Thermidor,
unless born blind, like Soubrany, Romme and Goujon, a fanatic whose
intellectual organs are as rigid as the limbs of a fakir, nobody in
the Convention can any longer believe in the Contrat-Social, in a
despotic equalizing socialism, in the merits of Terror, in the divine
right of the pure.   For, to escape the guillotine of the pure, the
purest had to be guillotined, Saint-Just, Couthon and Robespierre, the
high-priest of the sect.   That very day the "Montagnards," in giving
up their doctor, abandoned their principles, and there is no longer
any principle or man to which the Convention could rally.   In effect,
before guillotining Robespierre and his associates as orthodox, it
guillotined the Girondins, Hébert and Danton, as heretics.   Now, "the
existence of popular idols and of head charlatans is irrevocably
ended."[2] Ever the same conventional symbol before the empty
sanctuary in the blood-stained temple, and ever the same loud-intoned
anthem; but faith is gone, and only the acolytes remain to drone out
the revolutionary litany, old train-bearers and swingers of incense,
the subaltern butchers who, through a sudden stroke, have become
pontiffs; in short, the valets of the church who have donned the
mitres and croziers of their masters after having assassinated them.

From month to month, under the pressure of public opinion, they detach
themselves from the worship at which they have officiated, for,
however blunted or perverted their consciences, they cannot avoid
admitting that Jacobinism, as they have practiced it, was the religion
of robbery and murder.   Previous to Thermidor an official
phraseology[3] drowned with its doctrinal roar the living truth, while
each Conventional sacristan or beadle, confined to his own chapel, saw
clearly only the human sacrifices in which he himself had taken part.
After Thermidor, the friends and kindred of the dead, the oppressed,
make their voices heard, and he is forced to see collectively and in
detail all the crimes to which, nearly or remotely, he has contributed
either through his assent or through his vote, the same as in Mexico,
the priest of Huichilobos walks about in the midst of the six hundred
thousand skulls amassed in the vaults of his temple.  -   In quick
succession, during the whole of year III., through the freedom of the
press and the great public discussions, the truth becomes known.
First, comes an account of the funereal journey of one hundred and
thirty-two Nantese, dragged from Nantes to Paris,[4] and the solemn
acquittal, received with transports, of the ninety-four who survive.
After this, come the trials of the most prominent terrorists, that of
Carrier and the Revolutionary Committee of Nantes, that of Fouquier-
Tinville and the old revolutionary Tribunal of Paris, that of Joseph
Lebon,[5] and, during thirty or forty consecutive sessions, hundreds
of minute, verified depositions ending in the most complete and
satisfactory testimony.  -   In the mean time, revelations multiply at
the tribune of the Convention; these consist of the letters of the new
representatives on mission and the denunciations of the towns against
their overthrown tyrants; against Maignet, Dartigoyte, Piochefer-
Bernard, Levasseur, Crassous, Javogues, Lequinio, Lefiot, Piorry,
Pinet, Monestier, Fouché, Laplanche, Lecarpentier, and many others.
Add to these the reports of commissions charged with examining into
the conduct of old dictators, Collot d'Herbois, Billaud-Varennes,
Barère, Amar, Vouland, Vadier and David, the reports of the
representatives charged with investigating certain details of the
abolished system, that of Grégoire on revolutionary vandalism, that of
Cambon on revolutionary taxes, that of Courtois on Robespierre's
papers.  -   All these rays combine in a terrible illumination which
imposes itself even on the eyes that turn away from it: It is now but
too plain that France, for fourteen months, has been devastated by a
gang of bandits.  All that can be said in favor of the least perverted
and the least vile is that they were born so, or had become crazy.[6]
-   The majority of the Convention cannot evade this growing testimony
and the Montagnards excite its horror; and all the more, because it
bears them a grudge: the 73 who were imprisoned and the sixteen who
were proscribed have resumed their seats, the 400 silent who have for
so long held their seats under the knife, remember the oppression to
which they have been subject.  They now recover and turn first against
the most tainted scoundrels, and then against the members of the old
committees.  - Whereupon the "Mountain," as was its custom, launches
its customary supporters, the starved populace, the Jacobin rabble, in
the riots of Germinal and Prairial, in year III., and proclaims anew
the reign of Terror; the Convention again sees the knife over its
head.  Saved by young men, by the National Guard, it becomes
courageous through fear, and, in its turn, it terrorizes the
terrorists.  The Faubourg Saint-Antoine is disarmed, ten thousand
Jacobins are arrested,[7] and more than sixty Montagnards are decreed
under indictment; Collot, Billaud, Barère and Vadier are to be
deported; nine other members of former committees are to be
imprisoned.  The last of the veritable fanatics, Romme, Goujon,
Soubrany, Duquesnoy, Bourbotte and Duroy are condemned to death,
Immediately after the sentence five of them stab themselves on the
stairs of the tribunal; two of the wounded who survive are borne,
along with the sixth, to the scaffold and guillotined.  Two
Montagnards of the same stamp, Rhul and Maure, kill themselves before
their sentence.  -   Henceforth the purged Convention regards itself
as pure; its final rigor has expiated its former baseness, the guilty
blood which it spills washing away the stains of the innocent blood it
had shed before.

Unfortunately, in condemning the terrorists, it pronounced its own
condemnation; for it has authorized and sanctioned all their crimes.
On its benches, in its committees, often in the president's chair, at
the head of the ruling coterie, still figure the members of the
revolutionary government, many of the avowed terrorists like Bourdon
de l'Oise, Bentabolle, Delmas, and Reubell; presidents of the
September commune like Marie Chénier; those who carried out "the 31st
of May," like Legendre and Merlin de Douai, author of the decree which
created six hundred thousand suspects in France; provincial
executioners of the most brutal and most ferocious sort, the greatest
and most cynical robbers like André Dumont, Fréron, Tallien and
Barras.  Under Robespierre, the four hundred mutes "du ventre" were
the reporters, the voters, the claqueurs, and the agents of the worst
decrees against religion, property and persons.  The foundations of
Terror were all laid by the seventy-three in confinement before they
were imprisoned, and by the sixteen who were proscribed before their
proscription.  Excepting ten or a dozen who stayed away, the
Convention, in a mass, pronounced judgment against the King and
declared him guilty; more than one-half of the Convention, the
Girondists at the head of them, voted his death.  The hall does not
contain fifty honorable men in whom character sustains conscience, and
who had a right to carry their heads erect.[8]  In no law they
passed, good or bad, did the other seven hundred have in view the
interests of their constituents.  In all their laws, good or bad, they
solely regarded their own interests.  So long as the attacks of the
"Mountain" and of the rabble affected the public only, they lauded
them, decreed them and had them executed.  If they finally rebelled
against the "Mountain," and against the rabble, it was at the last
moment, and solely to save their lives.  Before, as after the 9th of
Thermidor, before, as after the 1st of Prairial, the incentives of the
conduct of these pusillanimous oppressors or involuntary liberators
were baseness and egoism.  Hence, "the contempt and horror universally
poured out against them; only Jacobins could be still more odious!"[9]
If further support is given to these faithless mandatories, it is
because they are soon to be put out.  On the premature report that the
Convention is going to break up, people accost each other in the
street, exclaiming, "We are rid of these brigands, they are going at
last .  .  .  People caper and dance about as if they could not
repress their joy; they talk of nothing but the boy, (Louis XVIII.
confined in the Temple), and the new elections.  Everybody agrees on
excluding the present deputies .  .  .  .  There is less discussion on
the crimes which each has committed than on the insignificance of the
entire assemblage, while the epithets of vicious, used up and corrupt
have almost wholly given way to thieves and scoundrels."[10] Even in
Paris, during the closing months of their rule, they hardly dare
appear in public: "in the dirtiest and most careless costume which the
tricolor scarf and gold fringe makes more apparent, they try to escape
notice in the crowd[11] and, in spite of their modesty, do not always
avoid insult and still less the maledictions of those who pass them."
-   In the provinces, at home, it would be worse for them; their lives
would be in danger; in any event, they would be dragged through the
gutter, and this they know.  Save about "twenty of them," all who are
not to succeed in entering the new Corps Legislatif, will intrigue for
offices in Paris and become "state messengers, employees in bureaux,
and ushers to ministers;" in default of other places they would accept
those of "hall-sweeps." Any refuge for them is good against the
reprobation of the public, which is already rising and submerging them
under its tide.

II.   Re-election of the Two-thirds.

Decrees for the re-election of the Two-thirds.  - Small number of
Voters.  - Maneuvers for preventing electors from voting on the
decrees.  - Frauds in the returns of votes.  - Maintenance of the
decrees by force.  - Recruiting of the Roughs.  - The military
employed.  - The 13th of Vendémaire.

There is no other refuge for them except in supreme power, and no
other means for maintaining this but in the excesses of despotism,
dishonesty, mendacity and violence.  In the Constitution they
manufacture, they desire to remain the sovereigns of France and they
decree[12] at once that, willingly or not, France must select two-
thirds of its new representatives from amongst them, and, that she may
make a good selection, it is prudent to impose the selection upon her.
There is a show, indeed, of consulting her in the special decrees
which deprive her of two-thirds of her elective rights but, as in 1792
and in 1793, it is so contrived that she consents, or seems to
consent, to this arrangement.[13] - In the first place, they relied on
the majority of electors abstaining from a response.  Experience
indeed, had shown that, for a long time, the masses were disgusted
with the plebiscite farces; moreover, terror has stifled in
individuals all sentiment of a common interest;[14] each cares for
himself alone.  Since Thermidor, electors and mayors in the boroughs
and in the rural districts are found with a good deal of difficulty,
even electors of the second degree; people saw that it was useless and
even dangerous to perform the duties of a citizen; they would have
nothing to do with public functions.  A foreigner writes,[15] after
traversing France from Bourg-en-Bresse to Paris: "Ninety times out of
a hundred that I have asked the question,



'Citizen, what was done in the primary meeting of your canton?'

the answer would be:



'Me, citizen, what have I to do with it? I' faith, they had hard work
to agree!'

Or,

'What's the use? There were not many there! Honest folks stayed at
home.'"

In fact, out of at least six million electors convoked, five millions
do not come near the ballot-box, there being no embarrassment in this
matter as they do not vote.[16]

In the second place, precautions have been taken to prevent those who
come to vote on the Constitution from entertaining the idea of voting
on the decrees.  No article of the Constitution, nor in the decrees,
calls upon them to do so; slight inducement is held out to them to
come, in a vague style, through an oratorical interrogation, or in a
tardy address.[17] - In addition to this, on the printed blanks sent
to them from Paris, they find but three columns, one for the number of
votes accepting the Constitution, another for the number rejecting it,
and the third for "written observations" in case there are any.  There
are no special columns for marking the number of votes accepting or
rejecting the decrees.  Thereupon, many illiterate or ill-informed
electors might think that they were convoked to vote solely on the
Constitution and not at all on the decrees, which is just what
happened, and especially in the remote departments, and in the rural
assemblies.  Moreover, many assemblies, nearer Paris and in the towns,
comprehend that if the Convention consults them it is only for form's
sake; to give a negative answer is useless and perilous; it is better
to keep silent; as soon as the decrees are mentioned they very
prudently "unanimously" demand the order of the day.[18]  Hence out of
five primary assemblies on the average which vote for or against the
Constitution, there is only one which votes for or against the
decrees.[19] -  Such is the mode of getting at the voice of the
nation.  Apparently, it is induced to speak; in practice, its silence
is ensured.

The last and most ingenious expedient of all: when a primary assembly
speaks too loudly it is taken for granted that it kept silent.  In
Paris, where the electors are more clear sighted and more decided than
in the provinces, in eighteen well-known departments, and probably in
many others, the electors who voted on the decrees almost all voted
against them; in many cases, even their minutes state that the
negative vote was "unanimous," but the minutes fail to state the exact
number of the noes.  On this, in the total of noes hostile to the
decrees, these noes are not counted.[20]  Through this trickery, the
Convention, in Paris alone, reduced the number of negatives by 50,000
and the same in the provinces, after the fashion of a dishonest
steward who, obliged to hand in an account, falsifies the figures by
substituting subtractions for additions.-Such is the way, in relation
to the decrees, in which, out of the 300,000 votes which it accepts,
it is able to announce 200,000 yeas and 100,000 noes and thus proclaim
that its master, the sovereign people, after giving it a general
acquittance, a discharge in full, invests it anew with its confidence
and expressly continues its mandate.

It now remains to keep by force this power usurped by fraud.  -
Immediately after the suppression of the Jacobin riots the Convention,
menaced on the right, turns over to the left; it requires allies,
persons of executive ability.  It takes them wherever it can find
them, from the faction which decimated it before Thermidor and which,
since Thermidor, it decimates.  Consequently, its executive committee
suspends all proceedings begun against the principal "Montagnards ;" a
number of terrorists, former presidents of the sections, "the matadors
of the quarter," arrested after Prairial 1, are set free at the end of
a month.  They have good arms, are accustomed to vigorous striking
without giving warning, especially when honest folks are to be knocked
down or ripped open.  The stronger public opinion is against the
government the more does the government rely on men with bludgeons and
pikes, on the strikers " turned out of the primary assemblies," on the
heroes of September 2 and May 31, dangerous nomads, inmates of
Bicêtre, paid assassins out of employment, and roughs of the Quinze-
Vingts and faubourg Saint- Antoine.[21] Finally on the 11th of
Vendémiaire, it gathers together fifteen or eighteen hundred of them
and arms them in battalions.[22] Such brigands are they, that Menon,
"major-general of the army of the interior and commandant of the armed
force of Paris," comes the next day with several of his staff-officers
and tells the Committee of Five that he "will not have such bandits in
his army nor under his orders". "I will not march with a lot of
rascals and assassins organized in battalions "under the name of
"patriots of '89."   Indeed, the true patriots of '89 are on the other
side, the constitutionalists of 1791, sincere liberals, "forty
thousand proprietors and merchants," the elite and mass of the
Parisian population,[23] "the majority of men really interested in
public matters," and at this moment, the common welfare is all that
concerns them.  Republic or royalty is merely a secondary thought, an
idea in the back-ground; nobody dreams of restoring the ancient
régime; but very few are preoccupied with the restoration of a limited
monarchy.[24]  "On asking those most in earnest what government they
would like in place of the Convention, they reply 'We want that no
longer, we want nothing belonging to it; we want the Republic and
honest people for our rulers.'"[25] - That is all; their upraisal is
not a political insurrection against the form of the government, but a
moral insurrection against the criminals in office.  Hence, on seeing
the Convention arm their old executioners, "the tigers" of the Reign
of Terror, admitted malefactors, against them, they cannot contain
themselves.[26] "That day," says a foreigner, who visited many public
places in Paris, "I saw everywhere the deepest despair, the greatest
expression of rage and fury.  .  .  .  Without that unfortunate order
the insurrection would probably not have broken out." If they take up
arms it is because they are brought back under the pikes of the
Septembriseurs, and under Robespierre's axe.  -  But they are only
national guards; most of them have no guns;[27] they are in want of
gunpowder, those who have any having only five or six charges ; "the
great majority do not think of fighting;" they imagine that "their
presence is merely needed to enforce a petition;" they have no
artillery, no positive leader; it is simply excitement, precipitation,
disorder and mistaken maneuvers.[28]  On the contrary, on the side of
the Convention, with Henriot's old bullies, there are eight or nine
thousand regular troops, and Bonaparte; his cannon, which rake the rue
Saint Honoré and the Quai Voltaire, mow down five or six hundred
sectionists.  The rest disperse, and henceforth the check-mated
Parisians are not to take up their guns against the Jacobin faction
whatever it does.

III.   A Directory of Regicides.

The Directory chosen among the regicides.  - --It selects agents of
its own species.  - Leading Jacobins are deprived of their civic
rights.  - The Terrorists are set free and restored to their civic
rights.  - Example at Blois of these releases and of the new
administrative staff.

Supreme authority is now once more in the hands of the revolutionary
band.  - In conformity with its decrees of Fructidor, it first obliges
electors to take two-thirds of their new representatives from the
Convention.  And as, notwithstanding its decrees, the electoral
assemblies have not re-elected a sufficient number of the
Conventionalists, it nominates itself, from a list prepared by its
Committee of Public Safety, the one hundred and four which are
lacking: In this way, both in the council of the Five Hundred, as well
as in the council of the Ancients, it secures a clear majority in both
the houses of the Legislative Corps.  In the executive branch, in the
Directory, it assures itself of unanimity.  The Five Hundred, by
adroitly preparing the lists, impose their candidates on the Ancients,
selecting the five names beforehand: Barras, La Révellière de Lépeaux,
Reubell, Letourneur and Siéyès, and then, on Siéyès refusing, Carnot.
All of them are regicides and, under this terrible qualification,
bound at the risk of their heads, to maintain the regicide faction in
power.  - Naturally the Directory chooses its agents from among their
own people,[29] their ministers and the employees of their
departments, ambassadors and consuls, officers of all ranks,
collectors of taxes direct and indirect, administrators of the
national domains, commissioners of civil and Criminal courts, and the
commissioners of the departmental and municipal administrations.
Again, having the right to suspend and dismiss all elected
administrative bodies, it exercises this right.  If the local
authorities of any town, canton, or department seem to be anti-
Jacobin, it sets them aside and, either on its own authority, or with
the assent of the Legislative Corps, replaces them with Jacobins on
the spot.[30] In other respects, the Convention has done its best to
relieve its clients of their principal adversaries and most popular
rivals.  The night before its dissolution, it excluded from every "
legislative, municipal, administrative and judicial function,"[31]
even that of juryman, not only the individuals who, rightly or
wrongly, had been put on a list of émigrés and not yet stricken off,
but likewise their fathers, sons and grandsons, brothers and brothers-
in-law, their connections of the same degree, uncles and nephews.  In
all, probably two or three hundred thousand Frenchmen, nearly the
whole of the élite of the nation.  To this it adds the rest of this
élite, all the honest and energetic who, in the late primary or
electoral assemblies have "provoked or signed" any manifestation
against its despotism; if still in office they are to resign within
twenty-four hours, or be sent into perpetual exile. - Through this
legal incapacity of the anti-Jacobins, the field is free to the
Jacobins.  In many places, for lack of candidates that please them,
most of the electors stay away from the polls; besides this, the
terrorists resort to their old system, that is to say to brutal
violence.[32]  On again obtaining the support of the government they
have raised their heads and are now the titular favorites.  The
Convention has restored to them the civic rights of which they had
deprived their adversaries: "every decree of indictment or arrest"
rendered against them, "every warrant executed or not, all proceedings
and suits" begun, every sentence bearing on their revolutionary acts,
is cancelled.  The most "atrocious" Montagnards, the most sanguinary
and foul proconsuls, Dartigoyte and Piochefer-Bernard, Darthé, Lebon's
secretary, Rossignol the great September massacrer, the presidents of
former revolutionary committees, "patriotic robbers, seal-breakers"
and garroters, brazenly promenade the streets of Paris.[33] Barère
himself, who, condemned to transportation, universally execrated as he
traverses France, and who, everywhere on his journey, at Orleans,
Tours, Poitiers, Niort, comes near being torn to pieces by the people,
Barère is not sent off to Guienne; he is allowed to escape, to conceal
himself and live tranquilly at Bordeaux.  Furthermore,
Conventionalists of the worst species, like Monestier and Foussedoire
return to their natal department to govern it as government
commissioners.

Consider the effect of these releases and of these appointments in a
town which, like Blois, has seen the assassins at work, and which, for
two months, follows their trial.[34] - Seven of them, members of the
Revolutionary Committee, commanders of the armed force, members of the
district or department, national agents in Indre-et-Loire, charged
with conducting or receiving a column of eight hundred laborers,
peasant women, priests and "suspects," cause nearly six hundred of
them to be shot, sabered, drowned or knocked down on the road, not in
self-defense or to prevent escape, for these poor creatures tied two
and two marched along like sheep without a murmur, but to set a good
revolutionary example, so as to keep the people in proper subjection
by terror and enable them to line their pockets.[35] A minute
investigation has unfolded before the judges, jury and public of Blois
a long series of authentic facts and proofs, with eight days of
pleading and the most complete and glaring evidence; the sentence is
about to be pronounced.  Suddenly, two weeks before Vendémiaire 13, a
decree annuls the proceedings, which have already cost over 600,000
livres, and orders a new trial in another form.  Next, after
Vendémiaire 13, a representative arrives at Blois and his first care
is to set the butchers free.  - About thirty knaves ruled the town
during the reign of Terror, all strangers, save four or five, "all
more or less befouled with crime." At first, the principal
slaughterers:

* Hézine, Gidouin, and their accomplices of the neighboring districts,

*  Simon and Bonneau the ex-mayor of Blois,

* Bézard, a former soldier, convicted of peculation and of robbing
cellars which he had put under sequestration,

* Berger, an ex-monk, and then dragoon who, with pistol in hand,
forced the superior of his old convent to give up the funds of the
community,

* Giot, formerly a chief-butler of Monsieur (the King's brother),
next, a judge in the September massacres and then a quartermaster in
the Pyrenees army and a pillager in Spain, then secretary to the Melun
tribunal of which he stole the cash,  along with other nomads and
outlaws of the same stamp, most of them sots and roisterers, one an
ex-schoolmaster, another an ex-ladies hair-dresser, another an ex-
chair-bearer; all of them a vile lot, chosen by the government for its
agents, and, under new titles, resuming their old positions.  At the
head of the armed force is Gen. Bonnard, who is accompanied by a
prostitute and who passes his time in orgies, pilfering wherever he
can, and so shameless in his thievery as to be condemned, six months
later, to three months in irons.[36]  On arriving at Blois, he
organizes "a paid guard, composed of all the most abject Jacobins." -
Elsewhere, as here,[37] it is the full staff of the reign of Terror,
the petty potentates dethroned after Thermidor, the political
Bohemians restored to their functions.



IV.   Public Opinon.

Resistance of public opinion.  - Elections, year IV.  at Paris and in
the provinces.  - The Directory threatened by ultra Jacobins.  -
Forced amelioration of the Jacobin administration.

So, that after Vendémiaire 13, it looks as if the Jacobin band had
made the conquest of France a second time.  This, however not yet so,
for, if it has recovered its authority, it has not yet recovered the
dictatorship.  - In vain do Barras and Tallien, Dubois-Crancé, Merlin
de Douai and Marie Chénier, Delmas, Louvet, Siéyès and their corrupt
gang, the habitués of power, the despotic, unscrupulous theorists, try
to postpone indefinitely the opening of the legislative bodies, to
annul the elections, to purge the Convention, to restore for their own
advantage that total concentration of powers which, under the title of
revolutionary government, has converted France into a pachalic[38] in
the hands of the old Committee of Public Safety.[39] But the
Convention has become frightened for its own safety; at the last
moment the plot is exposed, and the blow frustrated.[40] The
Constitution, decreed, is put in operation, and a system of the law
has replaced the system of arbitrariness.  The Jacobin invasion,
through that alone, is checked and then arrested.  The nation is in a
condition to defend itself and does defend itself.  It gradually
regains lost ground, even at the center.  - At Paris, the electoral
body,[41] which is obliged to take two-thirds of its deputies from the
Convention, takes none of the regicide deputation representing Paris.
All who are chosen, Lanjuinais, Larivière, Fermon, Saladin, Boissy
d'Anglas, wished to save the King, and nearly all were proscribed
after the 31st May.  The departments show the same spirit.  The
members of the Convention for whom the provinces show a decided
preference are the most prominent of the anti-Jacobins: Thibaudeau is
re-elected by 32 electoral colleges, Pelet de la Lozére by 71, Boissy
d'Anglas by 72, Lanjuinais by 73.  As to the 250 of the new third,
these are liberals of 1789 or moderates of 1791,[42] most of them
honorable men and many of them well-informed and of real merit,
jurisconsults, officers, administrators, members of the Constitutional
Assembly or Feuillants in the Legislative Assembly, Mathieu Dumas,
Vaublanc, Dupont de Nemours, Siméon, Barbé-Marbois and Tronçon-
Ducoudray.  The capital, especially, chose Dambray, former general-
advocate to the Paris parliament, and Pastoret, former minister of
Louis XVI..  Versailles sends the two celebrated lawyers who defended
the King before the Convention, Tronchet and De Séze.  - Now, previous
to the 13th Vendémiaire, two hundred members of the Convention had
already heartily sided with the Parisian electors[43] against the
terrorists.  This creates a strong opposition minority inside the
Legislative Corps which function protected by the Constitution.
Hidden behind it and behind them, the élite and the plurality of
Frenchmen wait for better days.  The Directory is obliged to act
cautiously with this large group, so well supported by public opinion,
and, accordingly, not to govern à la Turk.  So they respect, if not
the spirit, at least the letter of the law, and not to exercise a too
barefaced influence on local elections.  Hence most of the local
elections remain free, so that the nation,

* in spite of the decree excluding every relation of an émigré and
every notorious opponent of the government from present and future
offices,

* in spite of fear, lassitude and disgust,

* in spite of the small number of votes, the rarity of candidates and
the frequent refusal of the elected to serve,[44]

substantially exercises its privilege of electing its administrators
and judges according to its preferences.  Consequently, the very large
majority of new administrators in the departments, cantons and
municipalities, and the very large majority of new civil and criminal
judges and justices of the peace are, like the new third of the
Convention, highly esteemed or estimable men.  They are untainted with
excesses, still preserving their hopes of 1789, but preserved from the
outset against, or soon cured of, the revolutionary fever.  Every
decree of spoliation or persecution loses some of its force in their
hands.  Supported by the steady and manifest will of their present
constituents, we see them resisting the commissioners of the
Directory, at least protesting against their exactions and brutality,
gaining time in favor of the proscribed, dulling the point of, or
turning aside, the Jacobin sword.

Again, on the other hand, the government which holds this sword dare
not, like the Committee of Public Safety, thrust it in up to the hilt.
If wielded as before it might slip from its grasp.  The furious in its
own camp are ready to wrest it away and turn the blade against it.  It
must defend itself against the reviving clubs, against Babeuf and his
accomplices, against the desperadoes who, through a nocturnal attempt,
try to stir up the Grenelle camp: in Paris, there are four or five
thousand now ready to undertake a "civic St.  Bartholomew," with the
old Conventionists who could not get themselves elected, at their
head, - Drouet, Amar, Vadier, Ricord, Laignelot, Chaudieu, Huguet,
Cusset, Javogues.  Alongside of them, the friends of Chalier,
Robespierre's and Marat's followers, and the disciples of Saint-Just,
Bertrand de Lyon, Buonarotti, Antonelle, Rossignol and Babeuf.  Behind
them, the bandits of the street, those "who gutted houses during the
Revolution," peculators or Septembriseurs out of employment, in short,
the relics of the terrorist gang or of the revolutionary army.  Their
plan, true to their precedents, character and principles, consists not
only in despatching "the rascals who keep coaches, the moneyed men and
monopolisers," all the deputies and functionaries who do not resign at
the first summons, but also, and especially, in killing "the General
of the Interior, his staff, the seven ministers and the five 'cocked-
hats' (panachés) of the Luxembourg," that is to say, the five
Directors themselves.  Such allies are troublesome.  Undoubtedly, the
government, which considers them as its forlorn hope, and that it may
have need of them in a crisis, spares them as much as possible.[45]
It allows Drouet to escape, and lets the trial of the Babouvists drag
along, only two of them being guillotined, Babeuf and Darthé; most of
the others are acquitted or escape.  Nevertheless, for its own
salvation, it is led to separate from the fiercest Jacobins and draw
near to peaceable citizens.--Through this internal discord of the
ruling faction, honest people hold on the offices they occupy on the
elections of the year IV..  No decree comes to deprive them of their
legal arms, while, in the Legislative Corps, as in the administrations
and the tribunals, they count on carrying new positions in the
elections of the year V.


V.   Actual aim of Jacobin Activities: Power and Wealth.

Elections of year V.  - Character and sentiments of the elected.  -
The new majority in the Corps Legislatif.  - Its principles and
program.  - Danger and anxiety of the Jacobin minority.  - Indecision,
division, scruples and weakness of the moderate party.  - Decision,
want of scruples, force and modes of procedure of the Jacobin faction.
- The 18th of Fructidor.  -

"It was a long time," writes a small trader of Evreux, "since so many
people were seen at the elections.[46].  .  .  .  The eight electors
for the town obtained at the first ballot the absolute majority of
suffrages.  .  .  .  Everybody went to the polls so as to prevent the
nomination of any elector among the terrorists, who had declared that
their reign was going to return." - In the environs of Blois, a rural
proprietor, the most circumspect and most peaceable of men, notes in
his journal[47]that " now is the time to take a personal interest.  .
.  .  Every sound-thinking man has promised not to refuse any office
tendered to him so as to keep out the Jacobins.  .  .  .  .  It is
reasonably hoped that the largest number of the electors will not be
terrorists and that the majority of the Legislative Corps being all
right, the minority of the furious, who have only one more year of
office, will give way (in 1798) to men of probity not steeped in
crime.  .   .  .  In the country, the Jacobins have tried in vain:
people of means who employed a portion of the voters, obtained their
suffrages, every proprietor wishing to have order.  .  .  .  The
Moderates have agreed to vote for no matter what candidate, provided
he is not a Jacobin.  .  .  .  Out of two hundred and thirty electors
for the department, one hundred and fifty are honest and upright
people.  .  .  .  .  They adhered to the last Constitution as to their
sole palladium, only a very few of them dreaming of re-establishing
the ancient régime." Their object is plain enough; they are for the
Constitution against the Revolution, for limited power against
discretionary power, for property against robbery, for upright men
against thieves.  - "Would you prevent, say the administrative
authorities of Aube,[48] a return to the disastrous laws of the
maximum, of monopolies, to the resurrection of paper-money? .  .  .
Would you, as the price of a blameless life, be once more humiliated,
robbed, imprisoned, tortured by the vilest, most repulsive and most
shameless of tyrants? You have only one recourse: do not fail to go to
your primary assemblies and remain there." The electors, warned by
their late personal and bloody souvenirs, rush to the polls in crowds
and vote according to their consciences, although the government
through the oaths it imposes, its official candidatures, its special
commissioners, its intimidation and its money, bears down with all its
weight on the resolutions they have taken.  Although the Jacobins at
Nevers, Mâcon and elsewhere, have forcibly expelled officers legally
elected from their bureaux, and stained the hall with their blood,[49]
"out of 84 departments 66 elected a plurality of electors from among
the anti-republicans, eight being neither good nor bad, while only ten
remained loyal to the Jacobins."[50] - Appointed by such electors, we
can divine what the new Third will be.  "Of the 250 Conventionalists
excluded by the draw scarcely five or six have been re-elected; there
are but eight departments in which the Jacobins have had any success.
"-Immediately after the arrival of the new representatives, the roll
of the Legislative Corps having been checked off, it is found that
"the Government has 70 out of 250 votes among the Ancients, and 200
out of 500 among the Council of the Young," and soon less than 200 in
this Council,[51] 130 at the most, who will certainly be excluded at
the coming renewal of the chambers in elections which are becoming
more and more anti-Jacobin.  One year more, as the rulers themselves
admit, and not one Conventionalist, not one pure Jacobin, will sit in
the Legislative Corps.  Consequently, according to the
revolutionaries, the counter-revolution will have taken place in the
year VI.

This means that the Revolution is to end in the year VI., and that the
pacific reign of law will be substituted for the brutal reign of
force.  In fact, the great majority of the representatives and almost
the entire French nation have no other end in view: they wish to rid
themselves of the social and civil régime to which they have been
subject since the 10th of August, 1792, and which, relaxed after
Thermidor 9, but renewed by the 13th of Vendémiaire, has lasted up to
the present time, through the enforcement of its most odious laws and
the maintenance of its most disreputable agents.  This is all.  - Not
twenty avowed or decided royalists could be found in the two
Councils.[52]  There are scarcely more than five or six - Imbert-
Colomès, Pichegru, Willot, Delarne - who may be in correspondence with
Louis XVIII.  and disposed to raise the royal flag.  For the other
five hundred, the restoration of the legitimate King, or the
establishment of any royalty whatever, is only in the background; they
regard it only at a distance, as a possible accompaniment and remote
consequence of their present undertaking.  In any event, they would
accept only "the mitigated monarchy,"[53] that which the Liberals of
1788 hoped for, that which Mounier demanded after the days of October
5 and 6, that advocated by Barnave after the return from Varennes,
that which Malouet, Gouverneur Morris, Mallet-Dupan and all good
observers and wise councillors of France, always recommended.  None of
them propose to proclaim divine right and return to aristocratic
feudalism; each proposes to abrogate revolutionary right and destroy
Jacobin feudalism.  The principle condemned by them is that which
sustains the theory of anarchy and despotism,

* the application of the Contrat Social,[54]

* a dictatorship established by coups détat, carried on arbitrarily
and supported by terror,

* the systematic and dogmatic persistence of assaults on persons,
property and consciences,

* the usurpation of a vicious, fanatical minority which has devastated
France for five years and, under the pretext of everywhere setting up
the rights of man, purposely maintaining a war to propagate its system
abroad.

That which they are really averse to is the Directory and its clique,
Barras with his court of gorged contractors and kept women, Reubell
with his family of extortioners, stamp of a parvenu and ways of a
tavern keeper, La Révellière-Lepaux with his hunchback vanity,
philosophic pretensions, sectarian intolerance and silly airs of a
pedantic dupe.  What they demand in the tribune,[55] is the
purification of the administration, the suppression of jobbery, an end
to persecution and, according as they are more or less excited or
circumspect, they demand legal sentences or simply the removal of
Jacobins in office, the immediate and entire suppression or partial
and careful reform of the laws against priests and worship, against
émigrés and the nobles.[56] -- Nobody has any idea of innovation with
respect to the distribution of public powers, or to the way of
appointing central or local authorities.  " I swear on my honor,"
writes Mathieu Dumas, "that it has always been my intention to
maintain the Republican Constitution, persuaded as I am that, with a
temperate and equitable administration, it might give repose to
France, make liberty known and cherished, and repair in time the evils
of the Revolution.  I swear that no proposals, direct or indirect,
have ever been made to me to serve, either by my actions, speech or
silence, or cause to prevail in any near or remote manner, any other
interest than that of the Republic and the Constitution." -- "Among
the deputies," says Camille Jordan, "several might prefer royalty; but
they did not conspire, regarding the Constitution as a deposit
entrusted to their honor .  .  They kept their most cherished plans
subordinate to the national will; they comprehended that royalty could
not be re-established without blows and through the development of
this bill." -- " Between ourselves," says again Barbé-Marbois, "there
were disagreements as to the way of getting along with the Directory,
but none at all as to the maintenance of the Constitution."[57]
Almost up to the last moment they confined themselves strictly to
their legal rights, and when, towards the end, they were disposed to
set these aside, it was simply to defend themselves against the
uplifted saber above their heads.[58]  It is incontestable that their
leaders are "the most estimable and the ablest men in the
Republic,"[59] the only representatives of free suffrage, mature
opinions and long experience, the only ones at least in whose hands
the Republic, restored to order and justice, would have any chance of
becoming viable, in fact, the only liberals.  And this is the reason
why the merely nominal Republicans were bound to crush them.

In effect, under a government which disavows attacks on persons and on
public or private property, not only is the Jacobin theory impossible,
but Jacobin wrongs are condemned.  Now, the Jacobins, even if they
have abjured their principles, remember their acts.  They become
alarmed on the arrival of the first Third, in October, 1795: "The
Conventionalists," writes one of the new deputies,[60] "look upon us
as men who will one day give them up to justice." After the entry of
the second Third, in May, 1797, their fright increased; the regicides,
especially, feel that "their safety depends only on an exclusive and
absolute dominion."[61] One day, Treilhard, one of their notables,
alone with Mathieu Dumas, says to this old Feuillant and friend of
Lafayette, of well known loyalty and moderation: "You are very honest
and very able men, and I believe that you really desire to maintain
the government as it is, because neither for you nor for us is there
any sure way of substituting another for it.  But we Conventionalists
cannot allow you to go on; whether you mean it or not, you are
gradually leading us to our certain ruin; there is nothing in common
between us." --  "What guarantee do you then require?" --  "Only one.
After that, we'll do all you want - we'll let you relax the springs -
give us this guarantee and we'll follow you blindly! -- "Well, what do
you mean by that?" -

 "Enter the tribune and declare that if you had been a member of the
Convention, you would have voted the death of Louis XVI.  as we did!"
-

 "You demand an impossibility.  You would not do this in our place.
You sacrifice France to vain terrors." -

 "No, the risk is not equal; our heads are at stake!"

Their heads, perhaps, - but certainly their power, places, fortunes,
comforts and pleasures, all that in their eyes makes it worth while to
live.  - Every morning, seventy Paris newspapers and as many local
gazettes in the large towns of the provinces expose, with supporting
documents, details and figures, not merely their former crimes, but,
again, their actual corruption, their sudden opulence founded on
prevarication and rapine, their bribes and peculations -

* one, rewarded with a sumptuously furnished mansion by a company of
grateful contractors;

* another, son of a bailiwick attorney and a would-be Carthusian, now
possessor of ecclesiastical property, restored by him at a great
outlay for hunting-grounds; another also monopolizes the finest land
in Seine-et-Oise;

* another, the improvised owner of four chateaux;

* another, who has feathered his nest with fifteen or eighteen
millions,[62]

With their loose or arbitrary ways of doing things, their habits as
hoarders or spendthrifts, their display and effrontery, their
dissipations, their courtiers and their prostitutes.  How can they
renounce all this? - And all the more because this is all they have.
These jaded consciences are wholly indifferent to abstract principles,
to popular sovereignty, to the common weal, to public security; the
thin and brittle coating of sonorous phrases under which they formerly
tried to hide the selfishness and perversity of their lusts, scales
off and falls to the ground.  They themselves confess that it is not
the Republic for which they are concerned, but for themselves above
everything else, and for themselves alone.  So much the worse for the
Republic if its interest is opposed to their interest; as Siéyès will
soon express it, the object is not to save the Revolution but the
revolutionaries.  - Thus disabused, unscrupulous, knowing that they
are staking their all, and resolute, like their colleagues of August
10, September 2 and May31 and like the Committee of Public Safety,
they are determined to win, no matter at what cost or by what means.

For this time again, the Moderates do not want to comprehend that the
war has been declared, and that it is war to the knife.  They do not
agree amongst themselves; they want to gain time, they hesitate and
take refuge in constitutional forms - they do not act.  The strong
measures which the eighty decided and clear-sighted deputies propose,
are weakened or suspended by the precautions of the three hundred
others, short-sighted, unreliable or timid.[63] They dare not even
avail themselves of their legal arms:

* annul the military division of the interior,

* suppress Augereau's commission,

* and break the sword presented at their throats by the three
conspiring Directors.

In the Directory, they have only passive or neutral allies,
Barthélémy, who had rather be assassinated than murder, Carnot, the
servant of his legal pass-word, fearing to risk his Republic, and,
moreover, calling to mind that he had voted for the King's death.
Among the "Five Hundred" and the "Ancients," Thibaudeau and Tronçon-
Ducoudray, the two leaders "du ventre," arrest the arms of Pichegru
and other energetic men, prevent them from striking, allow them only
to ward off the blow, and always too late.  Three days after the 10th
of Fructidor, when, as everybody knew and saw, the final blow was to
be struck, the eighty deputies, who change their quarters so as not to
be seized in their beds, cannot yet make up their minds to take the
offensive.  On that day, an eye-witness[64] came to Mathieu Dumas and
told him that, the evening before, in Barras' house, they discussed
the slaughter or transportation to Cayenne of about forty members of
the two Councils, and that the second measure was adopted.  On which a
commandant of the National Guard, having led Dumas at night into the
Tuileries garden, showed him his men concealed behind the trees, armed
and ready to march at the first signal.  He is to possess himself at
once of the Luxembourg (palace)[65] which is badly guarded, and put an
end to Barras and Reubell on the spot: in war one kills so as not to
be killed, and, when the enemy takes aim, you have the right to fire
without waiting.  "Only," says the commandant, "promise me that you
will state in the tribune that you ordered this attack, and give me
your word of honor."[66]  Mathieu Dumas refuses, simply because he is
a man of honor.  "You were a fool," Napoleon afterwards said to him in
this connection, "you know nothing about revolutions." - In effect,
honor, loyalty, horror of blood, respect for the law, such are the
weak points of the party.

The opposite sentiments form the strong points of the other party.  On
the side of the triumvirs nobody knows twinges of conscience, neither
Barras, a condottiere open to the highest bidder, and who understands
the value of blows, nor Reubell, a sort of bull, who, becoming
excited, sees red, nor Merlin de Douai, the terrible legist, lay
inquisitor and executioner in private.[67] As usual with the Jacobins,
these men have unsheathed the sword and brandished it.  In contempt of
the constitution, they provoked discussions in the army and let the
Legislative Corps see that, if it did not yield, it would be put out
at the point of the bayonet.  They let loose against it, " as in the
good old times,"[68] their executive riff-raff, and line the avenues
and tribunes with "their bandits of both sexes." They collect together
their gangs of roughs, five or six thousand terrorists from Paris and
the departments, and two thousand officers awaiting orders or on half-
pay.  In default of Hoche, whose unconstitutional approach was
reported and then prevented, they have Augereau, arrived expressly
from Italy, and who states publicly, "I am sent for to kill the
royalists." It is impossible to find a more narrow-minded and greater
military bully; Reubell, himself, on seeing him, could not help but
exclaim: What a sturdy brigand!" - On the 18th of Fructidor this
official swordsman, with eight or ten thousand troops, surrounds and
invades the Tuileries.  The representatives are arrested in their
committee-rooms or domiciles, or pursued, tracked and hunted down,
while the rest of their opponents, notables, officers, heads of
bureaux, journalists, former ministers and directors, Barthélémy and
Carnot, are treated in the same way.  Barbé-Marbois, on demanding by
virtue of what law they were arrested,[69] is told, "by the law of the
saber," while Sotin, Minister of the Police, adds with a smile, "You
may be sure that after what I have taken on myself, it matters little
whether one is more or less compromised." - Thus purged, the two
Councils complete themselves their purgation; they cancel, in forty-
nine departments, the election of their colleagues; through this
decree and transportation, through forced and voluntary resignations,
two hundred and fourteen representatives are withdrawn from the
Legislative Corps, while one hundred and eighty others, through fear
or disgust, cease to attend its meetings.[70] Nothing remains of the
two Councils, except, as in the English Parliament under Cromwell, a
"rump," which rump does business under drawn swords.  In the Council
of the Ancients, which, on the 18th of Fructidor, discussed at
midnight[71] the decree of transportation, "groups of grenadiers, with
a haggard look, in brusque language, with threatening gestures" and
fixed bayonets, surround the amphitheatre, and, mingled with the
soldiers and civil cut-throats, shout out their orders.  Such are the
supporters of the slanderous tale cooked up by the Directory.  The
voters need such arguments to make themselves believe in the grand
conspiracy which it denounces, to associate Barthélemy, Carnot,
Siméon, Barbé-Marbois, Boissy d'Anglas, Mathieu Dumas, Pastoret,
Tronson du Coudray as accomplices with a knot of subordinate
intriguers, contemptible "monkeys" (marmosets), dolts or spies, whose
papers have been in the hands of the police for six months, and whom
it forces to speak under lock and key.[72] All are enveloped in the
same net, all are confounded together under the same title, all are
condemned en masse without evidence or formality.  "Proofs!" exclaims
an orator, "none are necessary against the royalist faction.  I have
my own convictions."[73] - "Formalities !" exclaims another, "the
enemies of the country cannot invoke formalities which they would have
despised had they triumphed." - "The people are there," says a third,
pointing to a dozen ill-looking men who are present; "the whole people
ought to prevail against a few individuals!" - "Hurry up!" shouts a
soldier, who wants the discussion ended, "patriots, march, double-
quick!" - The debate, nevertheless, drags along, and the Government,
growing impatient, is obliged to intervene with a message: "The
people," says the message, "want to know what has become of the
Republic, what you have done with it.  .  .  .  .  The conspirators
have agents, even among yourselves." The message is understood, and
the representatives now understand that if they do not transport, they
themselves will be deported.  Therefore, "about fourteen or fifteen
stand up for the decree, while seven are against it; the rest remain
motionless:" it is thus that the decree to save the Constitution is
freely and legally passed.   Four years before this a similar decree
had passed to expel the Girondists, in just the same manner, with the
exception that, at that time, the Mountain made use of the populace,
while now the army is employed; but save the difference in the
figurants, the performance is simply a repetition of the same drama
that was played on the 2nd of June, and is now again played on the
18th of Fructidor.[74]

VI.   The Directory.

Dictatorship of the Directory.  - Its new prerogatives.  - Purge of
the Legislative Corps.- Purification of the administrative and
judicial authorities.  - Military commissions in the provinces.  -
Suppression of newspapers.  - The right of voting reserved to Jacobins
alone.  - Despotism of the Directory.  - Revival of Terror.  -
Transportation substituted for the guillotine.  - Treatment of the
deported on the way, in Guyana, and on the islands of Rhé and Oléron.
- Restoration of Jacobin feudalism.

This is the way in which the government of 1793 is brought back to
life:

The concentration of all public powers in the hands of an oligarchy, a
dictatorship exercised by about a hundred men grouped around five or
six leaders.

More independent, more despotic and less provisional than any
Committee of Public Safety, the Directory has arrogated to itself the
legal right of placing a commune in a state of siege, of introducing
troops within the constitutional circle[75] in such a way that it may,
at its discretion, violate Paris and the Legislative Corps.  In this
body, mutilated by it and watched by its hireling assassins,[76] sit
the passive mutes who feel themselves "morally proscribed and half-
deported,"[77] who abandon debate, and vote with its stipendiaries and
valets.[78] As a matter of fact, the two councils have, as formerly
the Convention, become chambers "of registry" of legislative mechanism
charged with the duty of countersigning its orders.  - Its sway over
the subordinate authorities is still more absolute.  In forty-nine
departments, specially designated by decree, all the administrators of
departments, cantons and municipalities, all mayors, civil and
criminal judges, all justices of the peace, all elected by popular
suffrage, are dismissed en masse,[79] while the cleaning out in the
rest of France is almost as sweeping.  We can judge by one example: in
the department of Doubs, which is not put down among those to be
purged, five hundred and thirty administrators or municipal
magistrates are dismissed in 1797, and, in addition, forty-nine others
in 1798.  The Directory puts its creatures in their places: suddenly,
the departmental, cantonal, municipal and judicial system, which was
American, becomes Napoleonic so that the local officials, instead of
being delegates of the people, are government delegates.  - Note,
especially, the most threatening of all usurpations, the way in which
this government takes justice into its hands and attributes to itself
the right of life and death over persons: not only does it break up
common criminal courts and reorganize them as it pleases, not only
does it renew and select among the purest Jacobins judges of the court
of appeals, but again, in each military division, it institutes a
special and expeditious court without appeal, composed of docile
officers, sub-officers and soldiers, which is to condemn and execute
within twenty-four hours, under pretext of emigration or priesthood,
every man who is obnoxious to the ruling factions.  -- As to the
twenty-five millions of subjects it has just acquired, there is no
refuge: it is forbidden even to complain.  Forty-two opposition or
"suspect" journals are silenced at one stroke, their stock plundered,
or their presses broken up ; three months after this, sixteen more
take their turn, and, in a year, eleven others ; the proprietors,
editors, publishers and contributors, among whom are La Harpe,
Fontanes, Fièvé, Michaud and Lacretelle, a large body of honorable or
prominent writers, the four or five hundred men who compose the staff
of the profession, all condemned without trial to banishment,[80] or
to imprisonment, are arrested, take flight, conceal themselves, or
keep silent.  The only voice now heard in France is the mega-phone of
the government.

Naturally, the faculty of voting is as restricted as the faculty of
writing, so that the victors of Fructidor, together with the right to
speak, now also monopolize the right of electing.  - Right away the
government renewed the decree which the expiring Convention had
rendered against allies or relations of émigrés.  moreover, it
excluded all relatives or supporters of the members of the primary
assemblies, and forbade the primary assemblies to choose any of these
for electors.  Henceforth, all upright or even peaceful citizens
consider themselves as warned and stay at home.  Voting is the act of
a ruler, and therefore a privilege of the new sovereigns, which is the
view of it entertained by both sovereigns and subjects:[81] "a
republican minority operating legally must prevail against a majority
influenced by royalism."[82] They are to see the government on
election days, launching forth "in each department its commission
agents, and controlling votes by threats and all sorts of promises and
seductions,[83] arresting the electors and presidents of the primary
assemblies," even pouncing on refractory Jacobins, invalidating the
returns of a majority when not satisfactory to them, and rendering the
choice of a minority valid, if it suited them, in short, constituting
itself the chief elector of all local and central authorities.  -
Finally, all institutions, laws, public and private rights, are down,
and the nation, body and soul, again becomes, as under Robespierre,
the property of its rulers with this sole difference, that the kings
of Terror, postponing their constitution, openly proclaim their
omnipotence, whilst the others hypocritically rule under a
constitution which they have themselves destroyed, and reign by virtue
of a title which interdicts royalty to them.

They, too, maintain themselves by Terror; only, like so many
Tartuffes, they are not disposed to act openly as executioners.  The
Directory, heir to the Convention, affects to repudiate its
inheritance: "Woe," says Boulay de la Meurthe, "to whoever would re-
establish scaffolds." There is to be no guillotine; its purveyors have
been too strongly denounced; they stand too near the red stream and
view with too great nervous horror those who fed it.  It is better to
employ death at a distance, lingering and spontaneous, with no
effusion of human blood, "dry," less repulsive than the other sort,
but more painful and not less certain; this shall be imprisonment on
the marshes of Rochefort, and, better still, transportation to the
feverish coasts of Guyanna: there is no distinction between the mode
used by the Convention and that of the Directory, except the
distinction between to kill and to cause death.[84] Moreover, every
brutality that can be employed to repress the indignation of the
proscribed by fear is exhausted on the way.  - The first convoy which
bears away, with thirteen others, Barthélémy, who negotiated the
treaty of Basle, Pichegru, the conqueror of Holland, Lafond-Ladébat,
president of the council of the Five Hundred, Barbé-Marbois, president
of the council of the Ancients, was at first provided with
carriages.[85] An order of the Directory substitutes for these the
prison van, an iron car with one door bolted and padlocked, and,
overhead, openings through which the rain poured in streams, and with
common boards for seats.  This lumbering machine without springs rolls
along at a fast trot along the ruts in the road, each jolt sending the
condemned inmates against the hard oak sides and roof; one of these,
on reaching Blois, "shows his black-and-blue elbows." The man selected
to command this escort is the vilest and most brutal reprobate in the
army, Dutertre, a coppersmith foreman before the Revolution, next an
officer and sentenced to be put in irons for stealing in the La Vendée
war, and such a natural robber that he again robs his men of their pay
on the road; he is evidently qualified for his work.  On stopping at
Blois, "he passes the night in an orgy with his brothers and friends,"
fellow-thieves and murderers as above described.  He curses Madame
Barbé-Marbois who comes to take leave of her husband, dismissing on
the spot the commandant of the gendarmerie who supports her in a
swoon, and, noticing the respect and attentions which all the
inhabitants, even the functionaries, show to the prisoners, he cries
out, "Well, what airs and graces for people that will perhaps be dead
in three or four days!" On the vessel which transports them, and still
in sight of Rochelle, a boat is observed rowing vigorously to overtake
them and they hear a shout of "I am Lafond-Ladébat's son! Allow me to
embrace my father!" A speaking-trumpet from the vessel replies: "Keep
away or you'll be fired on!" - Their cabins, on the voyage, are
noxious; they are not allowed to be on deck more than four at a time,
one hour in the morning and an hour in the evening.  The sailors and
soldiers are forbidden to speak to them; their food consists of a
sailor's ration, and this is spoilt; toward the end of the voyage they
are starved.  In Guyanna they are allowed one candle to a mess, and no
table-linen; they lack water, or it is not drinkable; out of sixteen
taken to Sinnamary only two survive.

Those who are deported the following year, priests, monks, deputies,
journalists and artisans accused of emigration, fare worse.  On all
the roads leading to Rochefort, sorrowful crowds are seen on carts or
tramping along in files, on foot, the same as former chains of
convicts.  "An old man of eighty-two, Monsieur Dulaurent of Quimper,
thus traverses four departments," in irons which strangle him.
Following upon this, the poor creatures, between the decks of the
"Décade" and the "Bayonnaise," crammed in, suffocated through lack of
air and by the torrid heat, badly treated and robbed, die of hunger or
asphyxia, while Guyanna completes the work of the voyage: out of 193
conveyed on board the 'Décade," only 39 remain at the end of twenty-
two months, and of the 120 brought by the 'Bayonnaise," only one is
left.  - Meanwhile, in France, in the casemates of the islands of Rhé
and Oléron, over twelve hundred priests become stifled or rot away,
while, on all sides, the military commissioners in the departments
shoot down vigorously.  At Paris, and in its environs, at Marseilles,
Lyons, Bordeaux, Rennes, and in most of the large towns, sudden
arrests and clandestine abductions go on multiplying.[86]  "Nobody, on
retiring to rest, is sure of awaking in freedom the next morning.  .
.  .  From Bayonne to Brussels, there is but one sentiment, that of
unbounded consternation.  No one dares either to speak to, encounter,
look at or help one another.  Everybody keeps aloof, trembles and
hides away." - So that through this third offensive reaction, the
Jacobin Conquest is completed, and the conquering band, the new
feudalism, becomes a fixed installation.  "All who pass here," writes
a Tours habitant, "state that there is no difference in the country
between these times and Robespierre's[87]..  .  .  .  It is certain
that the soil is not tenable, and that the people are continually
threatened with exactions as in a conquered country.  .  .  .
Proprietors are crushed down with impositions to such an extent that
they cannot meet their daily expenses, nor pay the cost of
cultivation.  In some of my old parishes the imposition takes about
thirteen out of twenty sous of an income.  .  .  The interest on money
amounts to four per cent.  a month.  .  .  Tours, a prey to the
terrorists who devour the department and hold all the offices, is in
the most deplorable state; every family at all well-off, every
merchant, every trader, is leaving it." -- The veteran pillagers and
murderers, the squireens, (hobereaux) of the reign of Terror, again
appear and resume their fiefs.  At Toulouse, it is Barrau, a
shoemaker, famous up to 1792 for his fury under Robespierre, and
Desbarreaux, another madman of 1793, formerly an actor playing the
parts of valet, compelled in 1795 to demand pardon of the audience on
his knees on the stage, and, not obtaining it, driven out of the
house, and now filling the office of cashier in the theatre and posing
as department administrator.  At Blois, we find the ignoble or
atrocious characters with whom we are familiar, the assassins and
robbers Hézine, Giot, Venaille, Bézard, Berger, and Gidouin.[88]
Immediately after Fructidor, they stirred up their usual supporters
against the first convoy of the deported, "the idlers, the rabble of
the harbor, and the dregs of the people," who overwhelmed them with
insults.  On this new demonstration of patriotism the government
restores to them their administrative or judicial "satrapies, and,
odious as they are, they are endured and obeyed, with the mute and
mournful obedience of despair.  " The soul sinks[89] on daily perusing
the executions of conscripts and émigrés, and on seeing those
condemned to transportation constantly passing by.  .  .  .  All who
displease the government are set down on these lists of the dead, so-
called émigrés, this or that curé who is notoriously known not to have
left the department." It is impossible for honest people to vote at
the primary assemblies; consequently, "the elections are frightful.
The "brothers" and their friends loudly proclaim that neither nobles,
priests, proprietors, merchants, nor justice are wanted; everything is
to be given up to pillage." Let France perish rather than accept their
domination.  "The wretches have announced that they will not give up
their places without overthrowing all, destroying palaces and setting
Paris on fire."

VII.  Enforcement of Pure Jacobinism.

Application and aggravation of the laws of the reign of Terror.  -
Measures taken to impose civic religion.  - Arrest, transportation,
and execution of Priests.  - Ostracism proposed against the entire
anti-Jacobin class.  - The nobles or the ennobled, not émigrés, are
declared foreigners.  - Decrees against émigrés of every class.  -
Other steps taken against remaining proprietors.  - Bankruptcy, forced
loan, hostages.

It is natural that with pure Jacobins one notes the re-appearance of
the pure Jacobinism, the egalitarian and anti-Christian socialism, the
programme of the funereal year; in short, the rigid, plain,
exterminating ideas which the sect gathers together, like daggers
encrusted with gore, from the cast-off robes of Robespierre, Billaud-
Varennes and Collot d'Herbois.[90]

In the forefront appears the fixed and favorite idea of the old-
fashioned philosophism.  By that I mean the consistent and decreed
plan to found a lay religion, and impose the observances and dogmas of
its theories on twenty-six millions of Frenchmen, and, consequently
extirping Christianity, its worship and its clergy.  The inquisitors
who hold office multiply, with extraordinary persistence and
minuteness, proscriptions and vigorous measures for the forcible
conversion of the nation.  The aim is to substitute the improvised
rites of a logical abstraction mechanically elaborated in the closet
for the tender emotions nourished by the customs of eighteen
centuries.  - Never did the dull imagination of a third-rate scholar
and classic poetaster, never did the grotesque solemnity of a pedant
fond of his phrases, never did the irritating hardness of the narrow
and stubborn devotee display with greater sentimental bombast and more
administrative officiousness than in the decrees of the Legislative
Corps,[91] in the acts passed by the Directory and in the instructions
issued by the ministers Sotin, Letourneur, Lambrechts, Duval and
François de Neufchateau.  War on Sunday, on the old calendar and on
fasting, obligatory rest on the décadi under penalty of fine and
imprisonment,[92] obligatory fêtes on the anniversaries of January 21
and Fructidor 18, participation of all functionaries with their cult,
obligatory attendance of public and private instructors with their
pupils of both sexes at civic ceremonies, an obligatory liturgy with
catechisms and programmes sent from Paris, rules for scenic display
and for singings, readings, postures, acclamations and imprecations.
One might shrug his shoulders at these prescriptions of cuistres and
these parades of puppets, if, behind the apostles who compose moral
allegories, we did not detect the persecutor who imprisons, tortures
and murders.  - By the decree of Fructidor 19, not only were all the
laws of the reign of Terror against unsworn priests, their harborers
and their followers, enforced again, but the Directory arrogated to
itself the right of banishing, "through individual acts passed for
cause," every ecclesiastic "who disturbed the public peace," that is
to say who exercised his ministry and preached his faith;[93] and,
moreover, the right of shooting down, within twenty-four hours, every
priest who, banished by the laws of 1792 and 1793, has remained in or
returned to France.  Almost all the ecclesiastics, even those who are
sworn, are comprised within the first category; the administration
enumerates 366 in the department of Doubs alone,[94] and 556 in that
of Hérault.  Thousands of ecclesiastics are comprised in the second
category; the administration enumerates over 800 who, returned from
the frontier of Spain alone, still wander about the southern
departments.  On the strength of this the moralists in office proclaim
a hunt for the black game in certain places, an universal destruction
without exception or reprieve.  For instance, in Belgium, recently
incorporated with France, the whole of the regular and secular clergy
is proscribed en masse and tracked for transportation; 560
ecclesiastics in "Ourthe and the forests", 539 in Escaut, 883 in
Jemmapes, 884 in Sambre-et-Meuse, 925 in la Lys, 957 in Deux-Nèthes,
1,043 in Meuse-Inférieure, 1,469 in Dyle, in all 7,260, without
counting the missing names.[95]  A number of them escape abroad or
hide away; but the rest are caught, and quite enough of them to load
and fill the carts constantly.  - "Not a day passes," says an
inhabitant of Blois,[96] "when from seven to twenty and more are
lodged at the Carmelites." The next day they set out for the casemates
of Rhé and Oléron, or for the Sinnamary marshes, where it is known
what becomes of them: after a few months, three-fourths of them lie in
the cemetery.  - In the interior, from time to time, some are shot as
an example - seven at Besançon, one at Lyons, three in the Bouches-du-
Rhône, while the opponents of fanaticism, the official
philanthropists, the enlightened deists of Fructidor, use all these
disguised or declared murders as a basis on which to rear the cult of
Reason.

It remains now to consolidate the worship of Reason with the reign of
Equality, which is the second article in the Jacobin credo.  The
object now is to mow down all the heads which rise above the common
level, and, this time, to mow them down, not one by one, but in large
groups.  Saint-Just himself had only covertly proposed so extensive
and so sweeping an operation.  Siéyès, Merlin de Douai, Reubell,
Chazal, Chénier, and Boulay de la Meurthe, more openly and decidedly
insist on a radical amputation.  According to them,[97] it is
necessary "to regulate this ostracism," by banishing "all those whose
prejudices, pretensions, even existence, in a word, are incompatible
with republican government." That is to say, not alone priests, but
likewise nobles and the ennobled, all parliamentarians, those who are
well-off and distinguished among the bourgeoisie and former notables,
about two hundred thousand property-holders, men and women; in short,
all who still remained among those oppressed and ruined by the
Revolution.[98] - The proposal was turned down by the ex-noble Barras
and by the public out-cry "of merchants and workmen themselves," and
banishment is replaced by civic degradation.  Henceforth,[99] every
noble or ennobled person, even if he has not left the territory, even
if he has constantly and punctually obeyed revolutionary laws, even if
he be not related to, or allied with, any émigré, finds himself
deprived of his quality as a Frenchman.  The fact alone of his being
ennobled or noble before 1789, obliged him to be naturalized according
to legal forms and conditions.  - As to the 150,000 gentlemen,
artisans and farmers who have emigrated or who have been accused of
emigration, if they have returned to, or remain in France, they are to
leave Paris and all communes above 20,000 souls within twenty-four
hours, and France in fifteen days.  If not, they are to be arrested,
brought before the military commissions and shot on the spot;[100] in
fact, in many places, at Paris, Besançon and Lyons, they are shot.  -
Now, a large number of pretended emigrants, who had never left
France,[101] nor even their province, nor even their commune, and
whose names have been put on the lists simply to strip them of their
property, find that they are no longer protected either by the
constancy or the notoriety of their residence.  The new law is no
sooner read than they begin to imagine the firing squad; the natal
soil is too warm for them and they speedily emigrate.[102] On the
other hand, once the name is down on the list, rightly or wrongly, it
is never removed.  The government purposely refuses to strike it off,
while two decrees are applied which render its removal
impossible;[103] each name maintained on the list of spoliation and
death relieves the Revolution of a probable adversary, and places one
more domain at its disposal.

The Directory renews and aggravates the measures of the Convention
against the remainder of the property-holders: there is no longer a
disguised but a declared bankruptcy.  386,000 fund-holders and
pensioners are deprived of two-thirds of their revenue and of their
capital.[104] A forced loan of 100 millions is levied progressively,
and wholly on "the well-off class." Finally, there is the law of
hostages, this being atrocious, conceived in the spirit of September,
1792, suggested by the famous motions of Collot d'Herbois against
those in confinement, and of Billaud-Varennes against the youth, Louis
XVII., but extended, elaborated and drawn up with cool legal acumen,
and enforced and applied with the foresight of an administrator.  --
Remark that, without counting the Belgian departments, where an
extensive insurrection is under way and spreading, more than one-half
of the territory falls under the operation of this law.  for, out of
the eighty-six departments of France,[105] properly so called, forty-
five are at this moment, according to the terms of the decree,[106] "
declared to be in a state of civil uprising." Actually, in these
departments, according to official reports, armed mobs of conscripts
are resisting the authorities charged with recruiting them, bands of
two hundred, three hundred and eight hundred men overrun the country,
troops of brigands force open the prisons, assassinate the gendarmes
and set their inmates free; the tax-collectors are robbed, killed or
maimed, municipal officers slain, proprietors ransomed, estates
devastated, and diligences stopped on the highways." Now, in all these
cases, in all the departments, cantons or communes, three classes of
persons, at first the relations and allies of the émigrés, next the
former nobles and ennobled, and finally the "fathers, mothers,
grandfathers and grandmothers of persons who, without being ex-nobles
or relations of émigrés," nevertheless form a part of the bands or
mobs, are declared "personally and civilly responsible" for the
violent acts committed.  Even when these acts are only "imminent," the
administration of the department must, in its report, give a list of
all the men and women who are responsible; these are to be taken as
"hostages," and kept in confinement at their own expense in the local
jail.  If they escape, they must be put on the same footing as
émigrés, that is to say punished with death.  If any damage is
sustained, they are to pay costs; if any murder is committed or
abduction effected, four amongst them must be deported.  Observe,
moreover, that the local authorities are obliged, under severe
penalties, to execute the law at once.  Note that, at this date, they
are ultra Jacobin, since to inscribe on the list of hostages, not a
noble or a bourgeois, but an honest peasant or respectable artisan, it
suffices for these local sovereigns to designate his son or grandson,
who might either be absent, fugitive or dead, as being "notoriously
"insurgent or refractory.  The fortunes, liberties and lives of every
individual in easy circumstances are thus legally surrendered to the
despotism, cupidity and hostility of the levelers in office.  -
Contemporaries estimate that 200,000 persons were affected by this
law.[107]  The Directory, during the three months of existence yet
remaining to it, enforces it in seventeen departments; thousands of
women and old men are arrested, put in confinement, and ruined, while
several are sent off to Cayenne -- and this is called respect for the
rights of man.

VIII.  Propaganda and Foreign Conquests.

Propaganda and foreign conquests.  - Proximity and advantages of
Peace.  - Motives of the Fructidorians for breaking off peace
negotiations with England, and for abandoning the invasion of foreign
countries.  - How they found new republics.  - How governed.  -
Estimate of foreign rapine.  - Number of French lives sacrificed in
the war.

After the system which the Fructidoreans establish in France, we may
consider the system they impose abroad - always the same contrast,
between the name and the thing, the same phrases covering the same
misdeeds, and, under proclamations of liberty the institution of
brigandage.  - Undoubtedly, in any invaded province which thus passes
from an old to a new despotism, fine words cleverly spoken produce at
first the intended effect.  But, in a few weeks or months, the
ransomed, enlisted and forcibly "Frenchified" inhabitants, discover
that the revolutionary right is much more oppressive, more harassing
and more rapacious than divine right.

It is the right of the strongest.  The reigning Jacobins know no
other, abroad as well as at home, and, in the use they make of it,
they are not restrained like ordinary statesmen, by a thorough
comprehension of the interests of the State, by experience and
tradition, by far-reaching plans, by an estimate of present and future
strength.  Being a sect, they subordinate France to their dogmas, and,
with the narrow views, pride and arrogance of the sectary, they
profess the same intolerance, the same need of domination and his
instincts for propagandas and invasion.  - This belligerent and
tyrannical spirit they had already displayed under the Legislative
Assembly, and they are intoxicated with it under the Convention.
After Thermidor,[108] and after Vendémiaire, they remained the same;
they became rigid against "the faction of old boundaries," and against
any moderate policy; at first, against the pacific minority, then
against the pacific majority, against the entreaties of all France,
against their own military director, "the organizer of victory "
Carnot, who, as a good Frenchman, is not desirous of gratuitously
increasing the embarrassments of France nor of taking more than France
could usefully and surely keep.  - If, before Fructidor, his three
Jacobin colleagues, Reubell, Barras and La Révellière, broke with him,
it was owing not merely to inside matters, but also to outside
matters, as he opposed their boundless violent purposes.  They were
furious on learning the preliminary treaty of Leoben, so advantageous
to France; they insulted Carnot, who had effected it;[109] when
Barthélémy, the ablest and most deserving diplomat in France, became
their colleague, his recommendations, so sensible and so well
warranted, obtained from them no other welcome than derision.[110]
They already desire, and obstinately, to get possession of
Switzerland, lay hands on Hamburg, "humiliate England," and "persevere
in the unlucky system of the Committee of Public Safety," that is to
say, in the policy of war, conquest and propaganda.  Now that the 18th
Fructidor is accomplished, Barthélémy deported, and Carnot in flight,
this policy is going to be applied everywhere.

Never had peace been so near at hand;[111] they almost had)it in their
grasp; conference at Lille it was only necessary to take complete hold
of it.  England, the last and most tenacious of her enemies, was
disarming; not only did she accept the aggrandizement of France, the
acquisition of Belgium and the left bank of the Rhine, the avowed as
well as the disguised annexations, the great Republic as patron and
the smaller ones as clients, Holland, Genoa, and the Cis-Alpine
country, but, again, she restored all her own conquests, all the
French colonies, all the Dutch colonies, except the Cape of Good
Hope,[112] and all the Spanish colonies except Trinidad.  All that
amour-propre could demand was obtained, and they obtained more than
could be prudently expected; there was not a competent and patriotic
statesman in France who would not have signed the treaty with the
greatest satisfaction.  - But the motives which, before Fructidor,
animated Carnot and Barthélémy, the motives which, after Fructidor,
animated Colchen and Maret, do not animate the Fructidoreans.  France
is of but little consequence to them; they are concerned only for
their faction, for power, and for their own persons.  La Révellière,
president of the Directory, through vainglory, "wanted to have his
name go with the general peace;" but he is controlled by Barras, who
needs war in order to fish in troubled waters,[113] and especially by
Reubell, a true Jacobin in temperament and intellect, "ignorant and
vain, with the most vulgar prejudices of an uneducated and illiterate
man," one of those coarse, violent, narrow sectarians anchored on a
fixed idea and whose "principles consist in revolutionizing everything
with cannon-balls without examining wherefore."[114] There is no need
of knowing the wherefore; the animal instinct of self-preservation
suffices to impel the Jacobins onward, and, for a long time, their
clear-sighted men, among them Siéyès, their thinker and oracle, have
told them that "if they make peace they are lost."[115] - To exercise
their violence within they require peril without; lacking the pretext
of public safety they cannot prolong their usurpation, their
dictatorship, their despotism, their inquisition, their proscriptions,
their exactions.  Suppose that peace is effected, will it be possible
for the government, hated and despised as it is, to maintain and elect
its minions against public clamor at the coming elections? Will so
many retired generals consent to live on half-pay, indolent and
obedient? Will Hoche, so ardent and so absolute, will Bonaparte, who
already meditates his coup-d'état,[116] be willing to stand sentry for
four petty lawyers or litterateurs without any titles and for Barras,
a street-general, who never saw a regular battle? Moreover on this
skeleton of France, desiccated by five years of spoliation, how can
the armed swarm be fed even provisionally, the swarm, which, for two
years past, subsists only through devouring neighboring nations?
Afterwards, how disband four hundred thousand hungry officers and
soldiers? And how, with an empty Treasury, supply the millions which,
by a solemn decree, under the title of a national recompense, have
once more just been promised to them.[117]  Nothing but a prolonged
war, or designedly begun again, a war indefinitely and systematically
extended, a war supported by conquest and pillage can give armies
food, keep generals busy, the nation resigned, the maintenance of
power of the ruling faction, and secure to the Directors their places,
their profits, their dinners and their mistresses.  And this is why
they, at first, break with England through repeated exactions, and
then with Austria and the Emperor, through premeditated attacks, and
again with Switzerland, Piedmont, Tuscany, Naples, Malta, Russia and
even the Porte.[118] At length, the veils fall and the character of
the sect stands out nakedly.  Defense of the country, deliverance of
the people, all its grand phrases disappear in the realm of empty
words.  It reveals itself just as it is, an association of pirates on
a cruise, who after ravaging their own coast, go further off and
capture bodies and goods, men and things.  Having eaten France, the
Parisian band undertakes to eat all Europe, "leaf by leaf, like the
head of an artichoke."[119]

Why recount the tragic comedy they play at home and which they repeat
abroad? The piece abroad is the same as that played in Paris for the
past eight years,[120] an absurd, hasty translation in Flemish, Dutch,
German, and Italian, a local adaptation, just as it happens, with
variations, elisions and abbreviations, but always with the same
ending, a shower of blows with gun and sword on all property-owners,
communities, and individuals, compelling the surrender of their purses
and valuables of every description, and which they gave up, even to
remaining without a sou or even a shirt.  As a rule, the nearest
general, or resident titulary in every small state which has to be
turned to account, stirs up malcontents against the established
authorities, never lacking under the ancient régime, especially all
social outcasts, adventurers, coffee-house ranters and young hot-
heads, in short the Jacobins of the country ; these, to the French
representative, are henceforth the people of the country, if only a
knot of the vilest sort.  The legal authorities are forbidden to
repress them, or punish them; they are inviolable.  Employing threats
or main force, he interferes in their support, or to sanction their
assaults; he breaks up, or obliges them to break up, the vital organ
of society; here, royalty or aristocracy, there, the senate and the
magistracy, everywhere the old hierarchy, all cantonal, provincial and
municipal statutes and secular federation or constitutions.  He then
inaugurates on this cleared ground the government of Reason, that is
to say, some artificial imitation of the French constitution; he
himself, to this end, appoints the new magistrates.  If he allows them
to be elected, it is by his clients and under his bayonets; this
constitutes a subject republic under the name of an ally, and which
commissioners dispatched from Paris manage to the beat of the drum.
The revolutionary régime with anti-Christian despoiling and leveling
laws, is despotically applied.  The 18th of Fructidor is carried out
over and over again; the constitution is revised according to the last
Parisian pattern, while the Legislative Corps and Directory are
repeatedly purged in military fashion.[121]  Only valets are tolerated
at the head of it: its army is added to the French army; twenty
thousand Swiss are drafted in Switzerland and made to fight against
the Swiss and the friends of Switzerland.  Belgium, incorporated with
France, is subjected to the conscription.  National and religious
sentiment suppressed, exploited, offended, to the extend of stirring
up insurrections,[122] religious and national.  Five or six rural and
lasting Vendées take place in Belgium, Switzerland, Piedmont, Venetia,
Lombardy, the Roman States and Naples, while fire, pillaging and
shooting are employed to repress them.  Any description of this would
be feeble; statements in figures are necessary and I can give but two.

One of them is the list of robberies committed abroad,[123] and this
comprises only the rapine executed according to order; it omits
private plunderings without any orders by officers, generals, soldiers
and commissaries; these are enormous, but cannot be estimated.  The
only approximate total which can be arrived at, is the authentic list
of robberies which the Jacobin corsair, authorized by letters of
marque, had already committed in December, 1798, outside of France, on
public or on private parties; exactions in coin imposed in Belgium,
Holland, Germany and Italy, amounting to 655 millions; seizure and
removal of gold and silver objects, plate, jewels, works of art and
other precious objects, 305 millions; requisitions of provisions, 361
millions; confiscations of the property, real estate and movables, of
deposed sovereigns, that of the regular and secular clergy, that of
corporations and associations even laic, of absent or fugitive
proprietors, 700 millions; in all, in three years 2 billion livres.  -
If we closely examine this monstrous sum, we find, as in the coffers
of an Algerian pirate, a booty which up to this time, belligerent
Christians, commanders of regular armies, would have shrunk from
taking, and on which the Jacobin chiefs incontinently and preferably
lay hands:

* the plate and furniture of churches in the Netherlands, in Liège,
and in the Electoral sections of the Lower Rhine, 25 millions;

* the plate and furniture of churches in Lombardy, in the three
Legations, in the State of Venice, in Modena, and the States of the
Church, 65 millions;

* diamonds, plate, gold crosses and other depots of the Monts.de-piété
at Milan, Bologna, Ravenna, Modena, Venice and Rome, 56 millions;

* furniture and works of art at Milan and in other towns, 5 millions;

* furniture and works of art in the Venetian towns and palaces of
Brenta, 6, 500,000;

* the spoils of Rome sacked, as formerly by the mercenaries of the Duc
de Bourbon, collections of antiques, pictures, bronzes, statues, the
treasures of the Vatican and of palaces, jewels, even the pastoral
ring of the Pope, which the Directorial commissary himself wrests from
the Pope's finger, 43 millions,

and all this without counting analogous articles, and especially
direct assessments levied on this or that individual as rich or a
proprietor,[124] veritable ransoms, similar to those demanded by the
bandits of Calabria and Greece, extorted from any traveler they
surprise on the highway.  -

Naturally operations of this kind cannot be carried on without
instruments of constraint; the Parisian manipulators must have
military automatons, "saber hilts " in sufficient numbers.  Now,
through constant slashing, a good many hilts break, and the broken
ones must be replaced; in October, 1798, 200,000new ones are required,
while the young men drafted for the purpose fail to answer the summons
and fly, and even resist with arms, especially in Belgium,[125] by
maintaining a revolt for many months, with this motto: "Better die
here than elsewhere."[126]  To compel their return, they are hunted
down and brought to the depot with their hands tied.  If they hide
away, soldiers are stationed in their parents' houses.  If the
conscript or drafted man has sought refuge in a foreign country, even
in an allied country as in Spain, he is officially inscribed on the
list of émigrés, and therefore, in case of return, shot within twenty-
four hours; meanwhile, his property is sequestrated and likewise that
of "his father, mother and grandparents."[127] -- "Formerly," says a
contemporary, "reason and philosophy thundered against the rigors of
punishment inflicted on deserters; but, since French reason has
perfected Liberty it is no longer the small class of regular soldiers
whose evasion is punished with death, but an entire generation.  An
extreme penalty no longer suffices for these legislative
philanthropists: they add confiscation, they despoil parents for the
misdemeanors of their children, and render even women responsible for
a military and personal offence."

 Such is the admirable calculation of the Directory - that, if it
loses a soldier it gains a patrimony, and if the patrimony fails, it
recovers the soldier: in any event, it fills its coffers and its
ranks, while the faction, well supplied with men, may continue turning
all Europe to account, wasting, in the operation, as many French lives
as it pleases; requiring more than one hundred thousand men per annum,
which, including those which the Convention has squandered, makes
nearly nine hundred thousand in eight years.[128]  At this moment the
five Directors and their minions are completing the mowing down of the
virile, adult strength of the nation,[129] and we have seen through
what motives and for what object.  I do not believe that any civilized
nation was ever sacrificed in the same way, for such a purpose and by
such rulers:  the crippled remnant of a faction and sect, some
hundreds of preachers no longer believing in their creed, usurpers as
despised as they are detested, second-rate parvenus raised their heads
not through their capacity or merit, but through the blind upheavals
of a revolution, swimming on the surface for lack of weight, and, like
foul scum, borne along to the crest of the wave-such are the wretches
who strangle France under the pretence of setting her free, who bleed
her under the pretence of making her strong, who conquer populations
under the pretence of emancipating them, who despoil people under the
pretence of regenerating them, and who, from Brest to Lucerne, from
Amsterdam to Naples, slay and rob wholesale, systematically, to
strengthen the incoherent dictatorship of their brutality, folly and
corruption.

IX.   National Disgust.

National antipathy to the established order of things.  - Paralysis of
the State.  - Internal discords of the Jacobin party.  - Coup d'État
of Floréal 22, year VI.  - Coup d'État of Prairial 30, year VII.  -
Impossibility of establishing a viable government.  - Plans of Barras
and Siéyès.

Once again has triumphant Jacobinism shown its anti-social nature, its
capacity for destruction, its impotence to re-construct.  - The
nation, vanquished and discouraged, no longer resists, but, if it
submits it is as to a pestilence, while its transportations, its
administrative purifications, its decrees placing towns in a state of
siege, its daily violence, only exasperate the mute antipathy.

 "Everything has been done," says an honest Jacobin,[130] "to alienate
the immense majority of citizens from the Revolution and the Republic,
even those who had contributed to the downfall of the monarchy.  .  .
Instead of seeing the friends of the Revolution increase as we have
advanced on the revolutionary path .  .  .  .  we see our ranks
thinning out and the early defenders of liberty deserting our cause."

It is impossible for the Jacobins to rally France and reconcile her to
their ways and dogmas, and on this point their own agents leave no
illusion.

"Here," writes the Troyes agent,[131] "public spirit not only needs to
be revived, but it needs to be re-created.  Scarcely one-fifth of the
citizens side with the government, and this fifth is hated and
despised by the majority.  .  .  .  Who attend upon and celebrate the
national fêtes? Public functionaries whom the law summons to them, and
many of these fêtes often dispense with them.  It is the same public
spirit which does not allow honest folks to take part in them and in
the addresses made at them, and which keeps those women away who ought
to be their principal ornament.  .  .  .  The same public spirit looks
only with indifference and contempt on the republican, heroic actions
given on the stage, and welcomes with transport all that bears any
allusion to royalty and the ancient régime.  The parvenus themselves
of the Revolution, the generals, the deputies, dislike Jacobin
institutions;[132] they place children in the chapel schools and send
them to the confessional, while the deputies who, in '92 and '93,
showed the most animosity to priests, do not consider their daughter
well brought up unless she has made her first communion. " -

The little are still more hostile than the great.

 "A fact unfortunately too true," writes the commissary of a rural
canton,[133] "is that the people en masse seem not to want any of our
institutions.  .  .  .  It is considered well-bred, even among country
folks, to show disdain for everything characteristic of republican
usages.  .  .  Our rich farmers, who have profited most by the
Revolution, are the bitterest enemies of its forms: any citizen who
depended on them for the slightest favor and thought it well to
address them as citizen, would be turned out of their houses."

 To call someone Citizen is an insult, and patriot a still greater
one; for this term signifies Jacobin, partisan, murderer, robber[134]
and, as they were then styled, "man-eaters." What is worse is that a
falsification of the word has brought discredit on the thing.  -
Nobody, say the reports, troubles himself about the general
interest;[135] nobody will serve as national guard or mayor.

 "Public spirit has fallen into such a lethargic slumber as to make
one fear its complete collapse.  Our successes or our failures excite
neither uneasiness nor pleasure.[136] It seems, on reading the
accounts of battles, as if it were the history of another people.  The
changes that take place within our borders no longer excite any
emotion; one asks out of curiosity, one is answered without any
interest, one learns with indifference."

"The pleasures of Paris[137] are not disturbed a moment by any the
Crises which succeed each other, nor by those which are feared.  Never
were the theatres and public entertainments more frequented.  At the
'Tivoli,' it is said that it is going to be worse than ever; the
country (patrie) is called la patraque, and dancing goes on."

This is understandable enough; how can one interest one's self in the
public weal when there is none, when the common patrimony of all has
become the private property of a gang, when this gang is devouring or
wasting all in the interior and outside the frontier, where it is
playing heads or tails? The Jacobins, through their final victory,
have dried patriotism up, that is to say, the deep inward spring which
supplies the substance, the vitality and the force of the State. - In
vain do they multiply rigorous decrees and imperious prescriptions;
each energetic blow is absorbed by the general and mute resistance of
intentional passivity and of insurmountable disgust.  They do not
obtain from their subjects any of that unconscious obedience, that
degree of passive co-operation, without which the law remains a dead
letter.[138] Their Republic, so young,

"is attacked by that nameless malady which commonly attacks only old
governments, a species of senile consumption to which one can give no
other definition than that of the difficulty of living; nobody strives
to overthrow it, although it seems to have lost the power of standing
erect."[139]

Not only does their domination paralyze instead of animating the
State, but, with their own hands, they undermine the order they
themselves have established.  Whether legal or extra-legal, it makes
no difference: under their rule, no constitution, made and remade, no
government, not even that of their leaders, can survive.  Once masters
of France, they quarrel over it amongst themselves, each claiming for
himself the whole of the prey.  Those who are in office want to stay
there; those who are out want to get in.  Thus is formed two factions,
while each repeats against the other the coup d'état which both have
together carried out against the nation.  - According to the ruling
clique, its adversaries are simply "anarchists," former
Septembriseurs, Robespierre's confederates, the accomplices of Babeuf,
eternal conspirators.  Now, as in the year VI., the five regents still
keep the saber-hilt firm in their grasp, and can therefore make the
Legislative Corps to vote as they please.  On the 22nd of Floréal, the
government cancels, in whole or in part, in forty-five departments,
the new elections, not alone those of representatives, but again those
of judges, public prosecutors, and the grand-jurymen.  Then it
dismisses the terrorist administrations in the departments and
towns.[140] - According to their adversaries (la coterie gouvernée),
the Directory and its agents are false patriots, usurpers, oppressors,
despisers of the law, squanderers and inept politicians.  As all this
is true, and as the Directory, in the year VIII., used up through its
twenty-one months of omnipotence, out of credit on account of its
reverses, despised by its generals, hated by the beaten and unpaid
army, dares no longer and can no longer raise the sword, the ultra
Jacobins resume the offensive, have themselves elected through their
kith and kin, re-conquer the majority in the Legislative Corps, and,
in their turn, purge the Directory on the 30 of Prairial.  Treilhard,
Merlin de Douai, and La Revellière-Lepaux are driven out; narrow
fanatics replace them, Gohier, Moulins and Roger Ducos.  Ghosts from
the period of the Terror install themselves in the ministries, Robert
Lindet in the Treasury, Fouché in the Police.  Everywhere, in the
departments, they put in or restore "the exclusives," that is to say,
the resolute scoundrels who have proved their capacity.[141] The
Jacobins re-open their Club under its old name in the hall of the
Manége.  Two directors and one hundred and fifty members of the
Legislative Corps fraternize with "all that the dregs of the people
provide that is vilest and most disgusting." Eulogies are here
pronounced on Robespierre and on Babeuf himself; they demand the levy
en masse and the disarming of "suspects." Jourdan exclaims in a toast,
"Here's to the resurrection of pikes! May they in the people's hands
crush out all its enemies!" In the council of the Five Hundred, the
same Jourdan proposes in the tribune to declare the "country in
danger," while the gang of shouting politicians, the bull-dogs of the
streets and tribunes, gather around the hesitating representatives and
howl and threaten as in 1793.

Is it, then, the régime of 1793 which is about to be set up in France?
- Not even that one.  Immediately after the victory, the victors 30 of
Prairial separated and formed two camps of enemies, watching each
other with arms in hand, entrenched and making sorties on each other:

On one side are the simple bandits and the lowest of the populace, the
followers of Marat, incorrigible monomaniacs, headstrong, conceited
spirits proud of their crimes and disposed to repeat them rather than
admit their guilt, the dogmatic simpletons who go ahead with their
eyes shut and who have forgotten everything and learnt nothing.  On
the other side, men still possessing common sense, and who have
profited somewhat by experience, who know what a government of clubs
and pikes leads to, who fear for themselves and are unwilling to begin
again, step by step, the mad course on which at each stage, they have
come near perishing.

On one side two members of the Directory, the minority of the
Ancients, the majority of the Five Hundred, and the vilest of the
Parisian rabble.  On the other, the majority of the Ancients, the
minority of the Five Hundred and three members of the Directory, the
latter supported by their executive staff.[142]  -

Which of the two troops will crush the other? Nobody knows; for most
of them are ready to pass from one to the other camp according as the
chances for success appear more or less great.  And, from day to day,
any defection amongst the Five Hundred, amongst the Ancients or in the
Directory, foreseen or not, may change a minority into a majority.
Where will the majority be to-morrow? From which side is the next coup
d'état to come -   Who will make it? Will it be the ultra Jacobins,
and, through another 9th of Thermidor, will they declare the mitigated
Jacobins "outlaws?" Will it be the mitigated Jacobins, and, through
another 18th of Fructidor, will they put the ultras under lock and
key? If one or the other of these blows is struck, will it succeed?
And if it succeeds will a stable government be at last established?
Siéyès well knows that it will not; he is farseeing in his acts,
although chimerical in his theories.  In power himself, titular
Director, counselor and guardian of the intelligent republic against
the stupid republic, he well knows that all of them, so long as they
are republicans of both bands, take a road without an issue.[143]
Barras is of the same opinion, and taking time by the forelock, turns
around and promises Louis XVIII.  his co-operation in restoring the
legitimate monarchy in exchange he receives letters patent granting
him full pardon, exemption from all future prosecution and a promise
of twelve millions.  -Siéyès, more sagacious, seeks force where it
exists, in the army; he prepares Joubert, sounds Moreati, thinks of
Jourdan, of Bernadotte and of Macdonald, before surrendering himself
to Bonaparte; "he requires a sword." Boulay de la Meurthe, comparing
in a pamphlet the English revolution with the French revolution,
announces and brings on the establishment of a military protectorate.
- "The Constitution of the year III.  will not work," said Baudin, one
of the Five Hundred, to Cornet, one of the Ancients, "only I do not
see where to find the executive arm." The Jacobin republic still
lives, and its servants, its doctors, already speak aloud of its
interment the same as strangers and heirs in the room of a dying man
who has become unconscious, like Tiberius when sinking in his palace
at Misene.[144] - If the expiring man does not go fast enough some one
will help him.  The old monster, borne down with crimes and rotten
with vices, rattles in his throat on his purple cushions; his eyes are
closed, his pulse is feeble, and he gasps for breath.  Here and there,
around is bed, stand groups of those who minister to his debauches at
Capri and his murders at Rome, his minions and executioners who
publicly take part in the new reign; the old one is finished; one need
no longer be circumspect and mute before corpse.  Suddenly the dying
man opens his eyes, speaks and asks for food.  The military tribune, "
the executive arm," boldly clears the apartment; he throws a pile of
bedclothes over the old man's head and quickens the last sigh.  Such
is the final blow; an hour later and breathing stops.

X.    Contrast between Civil and Military France.

Anti-social character of the sect and the faction.  - Contrast between
civil and military France.  - Elements of reorganization in
institutions, habits, and in military sentiments.  - Character of the
régime instituted on the 18th of Brumaire, year VIII.

If the Jacobin Republic dies, it is not merely on account of decay,
nor because of its murders, but, and above all, because it is not born
viable: at the outset it harbored within itself a principle of
dissolution an innate mortal poison, not alone for others but for
itself. - That which maintains a political society is the mutual
respect of its members, especially the respect of the governed for its
rulers and of the rulers for the governed, and, therefore, habits of
mutual trust and confidence.  On the part of the governed, a well-
grounded certainty that the rulers will not attack private rights,
and, on the part of the rulers, a well-founded certainty that the
governed will not attack public powers; both inwardly recognizing that
these rights, more or less broad or restricted, are inviolable; that
these powers, more or less ample or limited, are legitimate.  Finally,
each being convinced that, in case of conflict, the trial will be
conducted according to forms which law or custom provide; that pending
the discussion, the strongest will not abuse his strength, and that,
when the discussion is over, the successful party will not wholly
sacrifice the loser.  Only on this condition can there be harmony
between governors and the governed, participation of all in the common
work, internal tranquility, and, accordingly, stability, security,
well-being and force.  Without this deep and persistent disposition of
minds and hearts, the bond of union among men is absent.  It
constitutes the brightest of social sentiments; it may be said that
this is the soul of which the State is the body.  - Now, in the
Jacobin State, this soul has perished; it has not died out through
unforeseen accidents, but through a forced result of the system,
through a practical effect of the speculative theory, which,
converting each man into an absolute sovereign, sets every man warring
against other men, and which, under the pretence of regenerating the
human species, lets loose, authorizes and consecrates the worst
instincts of human nature, all the lusts of license, tyranny and
domination.  - In the name of a non-existent ideal people whom it
declares sovereign, the Jacobins have violently usurped all public
powers, brutally abolished all private rights, regarding the actual
living people as a beast of burden, and yet worse, as a robot,
subjecting their human machine to the cruelest restraints in order to
mechanically maintain it in the unnatural, rigid posture, which,
according to principles, they inflict upon it.  Thenceforth, all ties
are sundered between them and the nation; to prey upon, bleed and
starve this nation, to re-conquer it after it bad escaped them, to
repeatedly enchain and gag it - all this they could well do; but to
reconcile it to their government, never! - Between them, and for the
same reason, through another consequence of the same theory, and
another effect of the same lusts, no bond between them would hold.
Each faction inside of the party, having forged its ideal people
according to its own logical process and necessities, exercised the
orthodox privilege of claiming the monopoly of sovereignty.[145] To
secure the benefits of omnipotence, it has combated its rivals with
falsified, annulled or constrained elections, with plots and
mendacity, with ambushes and sudden assaults, with the pikes of the
rabble and with the bayonets of soldiers.  It has then massacred,
guillotined, shot, and deported the vanquished as tyrants, traitors or
rebels, and survivors do not forget this.  They have learnt what their
so called eternal constitutions amount to; they know how to estimate
their proclamations and oaths, their respect for law, justice, their
humanity; they understand them and know that they are all so many
fraternal Cains,[146] all more or less debased, dangerous, soiled and
depraved by their work; the distrust is irremediable.  They can still
turn out manifests, decrees and cabals, and get up revolutions, but
they can no longer agree amongst themselves and heartily defer to the
justified ascendancy and recognized authority of any one or among
their own body.  - After ten years of mutual assault there is not one
among the three thousand legislators who have sat in the sovereign
assemblies that can count on the deference and loyalty of a hundred
Frenchmen.  The social body is disintegrated; amongst the millions of
disconnected atoms not a nucleus of spontaneous cohesion and stable
co-ordination remains.  It is impossible for civil France to
reconstruct itself; as impossible as it would be to build a Notre Dame
of Paris, or a St.  Peter's of Rome out of the slime of the streets or
the dust of the highways.

With military France it is otherwise.  Here, men have made trial of
each other, and are devoted to each other, subordinates to their
leaders, and all to one great work.  The sentiments are strong and
healthy which bind human wills in a cluster of mutual sympathy, trust,
esteem and admiration, and all these super abound, while the free
companionship which still subsists between inferior and superior,[147]
that gay unrestrained familiarity so dear to the French, draws the
knot still closer.  In this world unsullied by political defilements
and ennobled by habits of abnegation,[148] there is all that
constitutes an organized and visible society, a hierarchy, not
external and veneered, but moral and deep-seated, with uncontested
titles, recognized superiorities, an accepted subordination, rights
and duties stamped on all consciences, in brief, what has always been
wanting in revolutionary institutions, the discipline of sentiments
and emotions.  Give to these men a countersign and they do not
discuss; provided it is legal, or seems so, they act accordingly, not
merely against strangers, but against Frenchmen: thus, already on the
13th Vendémiaire they mowed down the Parisians, and on the 18th of
Fructidor they purged the Legislative Corps.  Let a famous general
appear, and provided he respects formalities, they will follow him and
once more repeat the operation.  - One does appear, one who for three
years has thought of nothing else, but who on this occasion will
repeat the operation only for his own advantage.  He is the most
illustrious of all, and precisely the conductor or promoter of the two
previous ones, the very same who personally brought about the 13th of
Vendémiaire, and likewise, at the hands of his lieutenant, Augereau,
the 18th of Fructidor.  - Let him be authorized by the semblance of a
decree, let him be appointed major-general of the armed force by a
minority of one of the Councils, and the army will march behind him.
- Let him issue the usual proclamations, let him summon "his comrades"
to save the Republic and clear the hall of the Five Hundred; his
grenadiers will enter with fixed bayonets and even laugh at the sight
of the deputies, dressed as for the opera, scrambling off
precipitately out of the windows.[149] - Let him manage the
transitions, let him avoid the ill-sounding name of dictator, let him
assume a modest and yet classic revolutionary Roman title, let him
along with two others be simple consuls; the soldiers, who have
neither time nor leisure to be publicists and who are only skin-deep
republicans, will ask nothing more.  They regard their system as a
very good one for the French people, the despotic system without which
there can be no army, that which places the absolute command in the
hands of one individual.  - Let him put down other Jacobins, let him
revoke their late decrees on hostages and the forced loan, let him
restore safety and security to persons, property and consciences; let
him bring back order, economy and efficiency to the administrations;
let him provide for public services, hospitals, roads and schools, the
whole of civil France will welcome its liberator, protector and
restorer.[150] - In his own words, the system he brings is that of
"the alliance of Philosophy with the Sword," philosophy meaning, as
it was then understood, the application of abstract principles to
politics, the logical construction of a State according to general
and simple notices with a social plan, uniform and rectilinear.
Now as we have seen,[151] two of these plans square with this
theory, one anarchical and the other despotic; naturally, the
master adopts the latter, and, like a practical man, he builds
according to that theory a substantial edifice, with sand and lime,
habitable and well suited to its purposes.  All the masses of the
great work-civil code, university, Concordat, prefectoral and
centralized administration-all the details of its arrangement and
distribution of places, tend to one general effect, which is the
omnipotence of the State, the omnipresence of the government, the
abolition of local and private initiative, the suppression of
voluntary free association, the gradual dispersion of small
spontaneous groupings, the preventive ban of prolonged hereditary
works, the extinction of sentiments by which the individual lives
beyond himself in the past or in the future.  Never were finer
barracks constructed, more symmetrical and more decorative in aspect,
more satisfactory to superficial views, more acceptable to vulgar good
sense, more suited to narrow egoism, better kept and cleaner, better
adapted to the discipline of the average and low elements of human
nature, and better adapted to dispersing or perverting the superior
elements of human nature.  In this philosophical barracks we have
lived for eighty years.

THE END.

 (written in 1889).
__________________________________________________________________________
Notes:

[1] Gaudin, Duc de Gaëte, "Memoires," I., 28.  Gaudin, commissioner of
the Treasury, meets the president of the revolutionary committee of
his quarter, an excellent Jacobin, who says to him: "Eh, well, what's
all this? Robespierre proscribed! Is it possible? What is wanted -
everything was going on so well!" (It is true that fifty or sixty
heads fell daily.) "I replied, 'Just so, there are some folks that are
never satisfied.'"

[2] Mallet-Dupan, "Mémoires," II., 16.  (Letter of January 8, 1795.) -
Ibid., "Correspondance avec la cour de Vienne," I., 23, 25, 32, 34,
(January 8, 1795, on the four parties com posing the Convention).

[3] Marshal Marmont: "Memoires," I., 120.  (Report of General
Dugommier on the capture of Toulon.) "That memorable day avenged the
general will of a partial and gangrened will, the delirium of which
caused the greatest misfortunes."

[4] Memorial of the ninety-four survivors Thermidor 30, year II.,
acquitted Fructidor 28.

[5] Carrier indicted Brumaire 21, year III.  Decree of arrest passed
by 498 out of 500 votes, Frimaire 3; execution Frimaire 26.  Fouquier-
Tinville indicted Frimaire 28; execution Floréal 28, there being 419
witnesses heard.  Joseph Lebon indicted Messidor I, year III.  Trial
adjourned to the Somme court, Messidor 29; execution Vendémiaire 24,
year IV.

[6] Cf.  chapters 4, 5 and 6 of the present volume.  Numbers of
printed documents of this epoch show what these local sovereigns were.
The principal ones in the department of Ain were "Anselm, who had
placed Marat's head in his shop.  Duclos, a joiner, living before the
31st of May on his earnings; he became after that a gentleman living
on his rents, owning national domains, sheep, horses and pocket books
filled with assignats.  Laimant, a tailor, in debt, furnishing his
apartment suddenly with all the luxuriousness of the ancient regime,
such as beds at one hundred pistoles etc.  Alban, mayor, placing seals
everywhere, was a blacksmith and father of a family which he supported
by his labor; all at once he stops working, and passes from a state of
dependence to one of splendor; he has diamonds and earrings, always
wearing new clothes, fine linen shirts, muslin cravates, silk
stockings, etc.; on removing the seals in the houses of those
imprisoned and guillotined, little or nothing was found in them.
Alban was denounced and incarcerated for having obliged a woman of
Macon to give him four hundred francs on promising to interest himself
in her husband.  Such are the Ain patriots.  Rollet, another, had so
frightened the rural districts that the people ran away on his
approach; on one occasion he had two of them harnessed to his carriage
and drove them along for some time in this manner .  .  .  Another,
Charcot (of Virieu), before the Revolution, was a highway assassin,
and was banished for three years for an act of this description."
(Bibliotheque Nationale.  Lb.  41, No.  1318.  "The truth in reply to
calumnious charges against the department of Ain." Letter of Roux,
Vendémiaire, year III.)

[7] Decree of Germinal 12, year III: for the transportation of Collot,
Barère, Billaud-Varennes and Vadier.  Eight Montagnards are put under
arrest.  -   Decree of Germinal 14: the same against nine other
Montagnards.  ?Decree of Germinal 29: the same against Maribon-
Montant.  -   Decree of Prairial 6: twenty-nine Montagnards are
indicted.  -   Decree of Prairial 8: putting six Montagnards under
arrest.  -   Decree of Prairial 9: the same against nine members of
former committees.  -   Decrees of Prairial 10 to Thermidor 22, year
III: condemning 6 Montagnards to death, one to transportation and
twenty put under arrest.

[8] Barbé-Marbois," Mémoires," preface, p.  VIII.  "Except about fifty
men who are honest and intelligent, history presents no sovereign
assembly containing so much vice, abjectness and ignorance." ??Buchez
et Roux, XXXVII., 7.  (Speech by Legendre, Thermidor 17, year III.)
"It is stated in print that, at most, there are but twenty pure men in
this Assembly." -   Ibid., 27.  Order of the Lepelletier section,
Vendemiaire 10, year IV.  "It is certain that we owe the dearth and
all its accompanying evils to the incapacity and brigandage of the
present government."

[9] Mallet-Dupan, " Correspondance," etc., I., 211.  (May 27, 1795.)

[10] "Un Sejour en France," 267.  271, (Amiens, March 13, April 12,
1795.)

[11] Meissner, "Voyage à Paris," 123, 351.  (The author arrives in
Paris, September 22, 1795.)

[12] Decrees of Fructidor 5 and 13, year III.

[13] Mallet-Dupan ("Correspondance avec la cour de Vienne," I., 292,
August 30, 1795).  -   Moniteur, XXV., 518, 551.  (Session of
Fructidor 3.) The first idea of the commission of Eleven was to have
the Convention itself choose the two-thirds.  "Its opponents took
advantage of the public outcry and broke off this plan.  .  .  .  of
the Girondist cabal." Louvet, Fructidor 3, mounted three times into
the tribune to support this project, still more scandalous than the
other.  "Eh, what electoral assembly could be better than yours! You
all know each other well." Louvet adds this significant expression:
"The armies also will vote the new constitution.  I have no fears of
its fate."

[14] Moniteur, XXII, 22.  (Report of Lindet, 4th sans-culottide, year
II.) "Each man confines himself to his family and calculates his
resources."

[15] Meissner, 58.

[16] Decree of Fructidor s.  "All Frenchmen who voted at the last
primary assemblies will be admitted to vote on the acceptance of the
Constitution." - Archives Nationales, A.  II.  B.  638.  (General
recapitulation of the vote on the Constitution of the year III and on
the decrees of Fructidor 5 and 13 printed by order of the Convention
Vendémiaire, year IV.) Number of voters on the constitutional bill,
1,107,368.

[17] Moniteur, XXV., 637.  (Address to Frenchmen by Lareveillère-
Lepeaux, in the name of the Commission of Eleven, affixed to the
decree of Fructidor 13.) "Let all opposition to the legitimacy of this
measure cease! The only legitimate measure is that which saves the
country! Besides, if the majority of the primary assemblies of France
approve of it, who dares say that the people would have renounced its
sovereignty in thus expressing its will! " - Cf.  Sauzay, VII., 653 to
667, on the details and circumstances of the elections in one of the
departments.

[18] Archives Nationales1 A.  II.  B., 688.  (Procés-verbaux of the
primary meetings of Seine-Inférieure, Dieppe, "Liberté" section,
session of Fructidor 20.) The constitution is unanimously accepted by
forty-four voters, on a call of names.  Then, "before proceeding to
the nomination of electors the law was read, concerning the mode of
electing the two-thirds of the National Convention.  The President
having asked if any one wished to speak on this law the order of the
day was immediately called for on all sides." The electors are
appointed forthwith and the assembly adjourns.-The clerk, who has to
draw up the minutes, writes on the margin "forty-four voters
unanimously accept the Constitution as well as the decrees of
Fructidor 5 and 13," which is false.  It is clear that the scribe had
been instructed to enlarge the number of votes accepting the decrees,
which suggests doubts on the truth of the total furnished by the
convention.

[19] Ibid., A.  II.  B., 638 (General recapitulation).  I have taken
the number of primary assemblies in the twenty-two first departments
on the alphabetical list, that is to say, one quarter of the
territory, which warrants a conclusion, proportionately, on the whole
country.  In these twenty-two departments, 1,570 assemblies vote on
the constitution and only three hundred and twenty-eight on the
decrees.  The figures are herewith given: in the Côtes-du-Nord,
eighty-four primary assemblies; only one votes in favor of the
decrees.  Bouches du Rhone, ninety primary assemblies; four vote on
the decrees, two for and two against.  Aude, eighty-three primary
assemblies; four vote on the decrees, three for and one against.
Arriége, fifty-nine primary assemblies; two vote on the decrees.
Basses-Alpes, forty-eight primary assemblies: two vote on the decrees.
Maritime Alps, twenty-three primary assemblies; not one votes on the
decrees.

[20] Ibid., (Procés-verbaux of the primary assemblies of the
department of the Seine, Popincourt section, Vendémiaire) 91.  This
section, on learning that its vote against the decrees" was put down
as a cipher in the general count of votes," protested and declared
that "when the vote was taken at the meeting of Fructidor 22, it was
composed of 845 citizens representing 2,594 votes." Nevertheless, in
the general recapitulation of Vendémiaire its vote counts for nothing.
- The same remark for the "Fidélité" section.  Its minutes state that
the décrees are rejected "unanimously," and that it is composed of
1,300 citizens; its vote, likewise, goes for nothing.  The totals
given by the recapitulation are as follows: Voters on the
Constitution, 1,107,368.  For, 1,057,390.  Against, 49,978.  - Voters
on the Decrees, 314,382.  For, 205,498.  Against, 108,794.  - Mallet-
Dupan (I., 313) estimates the number of electors, at Paris, who
rejected the decrees, at eighty thousand.  Fiévée, "Correspondance
avec Bonaparte," introduction, p.  126.  - (A few days before
Vendémiaire 13, Fiévée, in the name of the Theatre-Français section,
came, with two other commissioners, to verify the returns announced by
the Convention.) "We divided the returns into three parts; each
commissioner undertook to check off one of these parts, pen in hand,
and the conscientious result of our labor was to show that, although
the Convention had voting done in a mass by all the regiments then in
France, individually, the majority, incontestably was against its
project.  Thus, while trying to have the election law passed under the
Constitution, both measures were rejected."

[21] Schmidt, "Tableaux de Paris pendant la Revolution." (Reports of
Messidor 1 and 24, year III.) "Good citizens are alarmed at the
numerous pardons granted to the members of the revolutionary
committees." "The release of numerous terrorists is generally turned
to account." - Mallet-Dupan, " Correspondance," etc., I., 259, 261,
321.  "The vilest terrorists have been set free; a part of them
confined in the chateau of Ham have been allowed to escape; they are
summoned from all parts of the kingdom; they even send for them
abroad, in Germany, in Belgium, in Savoy, in Geneva.  On reaching
Paris they are given leaders and organized.  September 11 and 12 they
began to meet publicly in groups and to use threats.  I have proof of
emissaries being engaged in recruiting them in the places I have
mentioned and in paying their expenses to the capital." (Letter of
September 26, 1795.)

[22] Buchez et Roux, XXXVII., 36, 49.  (Reports of Merlin de Douai and
Barras on the 13th of Vendémiaire.) - Thibaudeau, "Histoire de la
Convention et du Directoire," I., 209.  - Fabre de l'Aude, "Histoire
secrete du Directoire," I., p.10.  "The Convention opened the prison
doors to fifteen or eighteen hundred Jacobin lunatics, zealots of the
former members of the Committee of Public Safety." - Mallet Dupan,
(ibid., I., 332, 337, 361,) estimates the numbers of terrorists
enrolled at three thousand.

[23] Barbé-Marbois, "Mémoires,"9.  - Meissner, p.246.

[24] Mallet-Dupan, ibid., I., 282.  (Letter of August 16, 1795.) "At
Paris, the patriots of 1789 have got the upper hand.  The regicides
have the greatest horror of this class because they regard it as a
hundred times more dangerous than pronounced aristocrats." Ibid., 316.
- -Meissner, p.  229.  "The sectionists want neither a republic nor
monarchy but simply intelligent and honest men for the places in the
new Convention."

[25] Lavalette, "Mémoires," I., 162, 170.

[26] Meissner, p.  236.  - Any number of details show the features and
characters of the male and female Jacobins here referred to.  For
example, Carnot, ("Mémoires," I., 581,) says in his narrative of the
foregoing riot, (Prairial 1st.): "A creature with a horrible face put
himself astride my bench and kept constantly repeating: "To-day is the
day we'll make you passer le gout de pain? and furies posted in the
tribunes, made signs of the guillotine."

[27] Meissner, p.  238.-Fiévée, p.127, and following pages.

[28] Mallet-Dupan, I., 333, and following pages.  (Letter of October
24, 1795.) "Barras does not repeat the mistake made by the Court on
the 10th of April, and shut himself up in the chateau and the
Tuileries; he posts troops and artillery in all the avenues.  .  .  .
Fréron and two other representatives, supplied with coin and assignats
collected in the faubourg Saint-Antoine, four or five hundred bandits
which joined the terrorists; these formed the pretended battalions of
the loyal section which had been pompously announced to the
Convention.  No section, excepting the" Quinze-vingts," sent its
battalion, this section having separated at the outset from the other
forty-seven sections.  .  .  .  The gardens and court of the Tuileries
resembled a feasting camp, where the Committees caused distributions
of wine and all sorts of provisions; many of their defenders were
intoxicated; the troops of the line were kept loyal with money and
drink."- After Vendemiaire 13, the Convention brings further
reinforcements of regular troops into Paris to keep the city under,
amounting to eight or nine thousand men.

[29] Constitution of year III., Articles VI.  and VII.

[30] Albert Babeau, "Histoire de Troyes," II., 367 and following
pages.  Sauzay, "Hist.  de la Persecution Révolutionnaire dans le
Doubs," VIII., ch.  52 and 54 - Law of Pluviôse 4, year IV.,
authorizing the executive Directory to appoint the members who, up to
Thermidor I, year IV., shall compose the municipal bodies of Bordeaux,
Lyons, Marseilles and Paris.

[31] Decree of Brumaire 3, year IV.

[32] Archives Nationales, AF., II., 65.  (Letter of Gen.  Kermorvan,
to the Com.  of Public Safety, Valenciennes, Fructidor 22, year III.)
At Valenciennes, during the elections, "the leaders of the sections
used their fists in driving out of the primary assemblies all the
worthy men possessing the necessary qualities for election.  .  .  .
I knew that the "seal-breakers," (brise-scellés), were the promoters
of these turbulent parties, the patriotic robbers, the men who have
wasted public and private fortunes belonging to the commune, and who
are reveling in the houses and on the estates of the émigrés which
they have had awarded to them at a hundred times below their value.  .
.  .  All of them are appointed electors.  .  .  .  They have paid .
.  .  .  and still pay agitators to intimidate honest folks by terror,
in order to keep what they have seized, awaiting an opportunity to get
more.  .  .  .  When the elections were over they sent daring men,
undoubtedly paid, to insult people as they passed, calling them
royalist chouans." (He mentions the dispatch of supporting
affidavits.) - Mercier, "Le Nouveau Paris," II., 315.  "Peaceable
people in Paris refuse to go to the polls," so as to "avoid being
struck and knocked down." - Sauzay, VIII., 9.  At Besançon, Nov.  6,
1795, out of 5,309 registered voters, only 1,324 vote and the elected
are terrorists.  - Archives Nationales, F.7, 7090.  (Documents on the
Jacobin insurrection of Nivôse 4 and 5, year IV., at Arles): "The
exclusives, or amnestied, regarded the Constitution only as a means of
arriving at a new state of anarchy by getting possession of all the
offices.  .  .  .  Shouts and cries of Vive Marat! and Robespierre to
the Pantheon! were often repeated.  -- The principal band was composed
of genuine Terrorists, of the men who under Robespierre's reign bore
the guillotine about in triumph, imitating its cruel performances on
every corner with a manikin expressly made for the occasion." --
"Domiciliary visits, rummaging everywhere, stealing jewelry, money,
clothes, etc."

[33] Mallet-Dupan, II., 363.  -- Schmidt (Police report of Brumaire 26
and 27).

[34] Dufort de Cheverney, (manuscript memoirs communicated by Robert
de Crêvecur).  -- Report of the public prosecutor, dated Thermidor
13, year III., according to documents handed in on Messidor 16, by the
foreman of the jury of indictment and by the juges de paix of Chinon,
Saumur, Tours, Amboise, Blois, Beaugency, etc., relating to the
charges made by the administrators of the department of Loire-et-Cher,
dated Frimaire 30, year II., concerning the fusillades at Blois,
Frimaire 19, year II.

[35] The line of this march from Saumur to Montsoreau could be traced
by the blood along the road; the leaders shot those who faltered with
fatigue.  - On reaching Blois, Frimaire 18, Hézine says, before the
town-hall, "To-morrow morning they shall be straightened out and we'll
show the Blésois how the thing is managed." The following day, Hézine
and Gidouin, taking a walk with Lepetit, commander of the escort, in
the court of the inn, say to him: "You'll shoot some of them for us.
You must give the people an example by shooting some of those rascally
priests." Lepetit orders out four peasants and placing them himself on
the river bank, gives the command to fire and to throw them in.
Hézine and Gidoum shout Vive la Nation! Gidouin then says to Lepetit:
"You don't mean to stop with those four peasants? won't you give us a
few curés?" Five priests are shot.  - At Beaugency, there is a fresh
fusillade.  The leaders take the best part of the spoil.  Among other
objects, Lepetit has a coffer sent into his chamber and takes the
effects it contains and sells a bed and mattress beside.

[36] Ibid., (March, 1796).  "Meanwhile, the young men who were
recruited, hid themselves: Bonnard made them pay, and still made them
set out.  Baillon, quartermaster in the war, told me that he had paid
Bonnard 900,000 livres in assignats in twelve days, and 1,400,000 in
twenty days; there were 35,000 in the memoir for pens, penknives, ink,
and paper."

[37] Mallet-Dupan, "Correspondance, etc.," I., 383.  (Letter of
Dec.13, 1795.) " The Directory keeps on filling the offices with
Terrorists.  The government agents in the departments arbitrarily set
aside the constituted authorities and replace them with Jacobins."

[38] Province in ancient Turkey governed by a Pasha.  (SR.)

[39] Thibaudeau, "Histoire de la Convention," I., 243.  "Tallien,
Barras, Chenier and Louvet talked of nothing but of annulling the
elections.  .  .  .  Nothing was heard at the bar and in the tribunals
but the most revolutionary propositions.  The 'Mountain' showed
incredible audacity.  The public tribunes were filled with
confederates who applauded furiously.  .  .  Tallien and Barras ruled
and shared the dictatorship between them.  Since 13th of Vendémiaire,
the Convention no longer deliberated except when in the middle of a
camp; the exterior, the tribunes, even the hall itself are invested by
soldiers and terrorists." - Mallet Dupan, "Correspondance, etc.," I.,
248.  (Letter of Oct.  31, 1795.)

[40] Thibaudeau, Ibid., I., 246, et seq.  -- Moniteur.  (Session of
Brumaire 1.) Speech by Thibaudeau.

[41] Mallet-Dupan, ibid., I., 328.  (Letter Oct.  4, 1795.) "Nearly
all the electors nominated at Paris are former administrators,
distinguished and sensible writers, persons recommendable through
their position, fortune and intelligence.  They are the royalists of
1789, that is to say about in the sense of the constitution of 1791,
essentially changed fundamentally.  M. d'Ormesson, former
comptroller-general of the Treasury, the Marquis of Gontant, M. de
Vandeuil, former maitre de requêtes, M. Garnier, former conseiller au
Châtelet of Paris and others of the same order, all electors.  It is
another world ; in one month we have gone back five years." - Ibid.,
343, 350, 359, 373.

[42] Barbé-Marbois, " Journal d'un Déporté," preface, p.  XIV.
"Outside of five or six men who might be regarded as 'suspects' of
royalism the most animated were only really irritated against the
despotic conduct and depredations of the directors and not against the
republican system."

[43] Mallet-Dupan, ibid:, I., 369.  (Letter of Nov.22, 1795.) "Never
would the resistance of the sections have shown itself so unanimously
and so perseveringly without the promptings of the two hundred
monarchist members of the convention and the aid they promised.  They
had engaged to enter the tribune and support the cause of Paris, to
carry the majority and, in case they did not succeed in revoking the
decree respecting the two-thirds, to withdraw from the Convention and
come and take their seats with the sections; the pusillanimity of
these two hundred members caused the failure of these promises.  .  .
.  I guarantee the authenticity of this statement."

[44] Souvenirs et Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," pp.103, 106.  "The
Constitution has been adopted by a very small number of citizens, for,
in the section of the Nord only one hundred and fifty voters at most
are found amongst twelve hundred or fifteen hundred estimated.
(September 6, 1795.) - On Tuesday, November 10, "the section
assemblies of Evreux completed their nominations of juge de paix and
of its assessors and five municipal officers.  It took time, because
there were a great many who declined."

[45] Thibaudeau, "Mémoires sur le Convention et le Directoire," II.,
58.  - Mallet-Dupan, ("Correspondance, etc.," II., 281.) Dufort de
Cheverney, ("Mémoires" in manuscript).  He is at Vendôme and attends
the trial out of curiosity.  "Germain, cheerful and witty, makes fun
of the jurymen: they are really stupid, said he, not to see conspiracy
when there was as complete a one as ever existed.  .  .  .  Besides, I
conspired and always shall."

[46] "Souvenir et Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," p.  118 (March 24,
1797).

[47] Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires," (March, 1797).

[48] Albert Babeau, II., 408, et seq.  (Address of the administrators
of Aube for the elections of year V.) - Ibid., 414.  (Speech by
Herlinson, Librarian of the Ecole Centrale at Troyes, Thermidor 10,
year V.  in the large hall of the Hôtel-de-Ville, before the
commissioners of the Directory, and received with unbounded applause.)
"The patriots consisted of fools, madmen and knaves, the first in
their illusions, the second in their dreams and the third in their
acts.  .  .  .  Everywhere you would see two or three executioners, a
dozen satellites, of whom one-half trembled for their lives, and about
a hundred witnesses, most of them in spite of themselves, against
thousands of victims.  .  .  .  Vengeance is not necessary; never was
special vengeance of any benefit to the public.  Let them rest in
their slough, let them live as objects of contempt and horror."-Cf.
Sauzay, VIII., p.659 et seq.

[49] Thibaudeau, II., 152, 153.-- Mallet-Dupan, II., 262.

[50] Mallet-Dupan, II., 265, 268, 278.

[51] Thibaudeau, II., 244, 248.

[52] Carnot, "Mémoires," II., 108.  "Not fifteen leaders.  " -
Lacretelle, "Dix Années d'Épreuves," p.308.  "Twenty or thirty men
devoted to monarchical opinions, but who did not dare state them
openly."

[53] Mallet-Dupan, II., 267, 278, 331.

[54] Mallet-Dupan, II., 265.  "Not only have they discarded (at Paris)
the Republicans, but even those among the old Constituents, known or
denounced for having taken too important a part in the first
revolution .  .  .  .  Men have been chosen who aspired to a modified
and not perverted monarchy.  The suffrages have equally distanced
themselves from the sectarian royalists of the ancient régime as well
as the violent anti-revolutionaries."

[55] Mallet-Dupan, 11., 298.  "The deputies never attack a
revolutionary law, but they are mistrusted of some design of
destroying the results of the Revolution, and every time they speak of
regulating the Republic they are accused of ill-will to the Republic."

[56] Thibaudeau, II., 171.  - Carnot, II., 106.  - The programme of
Barthélémy is contained in this simple phrase: "I would render the
Republic administrative." On the foreign policy, his ideas, so
temperate, pacific and really French, are received with derision by
the other Directors.  (Andre Lebon, " Angleterre et l'Emigration
Française," p.  335.)

[57] Mathieu Dumas, "Souvenirs," III., 153.  - Camille Jordan.
(Letter to his constituents on the Revolution, Fructidor 18, p.26.)
"The Constitution, the Constitution alone, is the rallying word at
Clichy.  " - Barbé-Marbois, "Souvenirs d'un Déporté," I., page 12 and
preface.  The largest number wanted to disregard the future and forget
the past."

[58] Mallet-Dupan, II., 336.  "Eighty of the deputies who were menaced
have slept elsewhere since the 30th of August, keeping together in one
domicile for fear of being carried off at night." -- Mathieu Dumas,
III., 10.  "I could no longer occupy my house in Paris, rue Fosses-du-
Temple, without risking an attack from the sbirri (Italian police
officers) of the Directory, who pro claimed in the clubs that the
people must be avenged in (our) houses.  " - Mallet-Dupan, II.  343.
"This pretended conspiracy imputed to the councils by the triumvirs,
is a romance similar to those of Robespierre." - Ibid., 346.  "There
has been no conspiracy, properly so-called, of the Legislative Corps
against the Directory." - Only, "every constitution in France kills
the Revolution if the Revolutionary leaders has not destroyed in time.
And this, because four-fifths of France being detached from the
Revolution, the elections will put into the legislative and
administrative offices men who were opposed to the Revolution."

[59] Lord Malmesbury, "Diaries," II., 544.  (September 9, 1797.) The
words of Mr.  Colchen.) "He went on to say that all the persons
arrested are the most estimable and most able men in the Republic.  It
is for this reason and not from any principles of royalism (for such
principles do not belong to them) that they are sentenced to
transportation.  They would have supported the constitution, but in
doing that they would have circumscribed the authority of the
executive power and have taken from the Directory the means of
acquiring and exercising undue authority."

[60] Barbé-Marbois, "Journal d'un Déporté," preface, p.  XVI.

[61] Mathieu Dumas, III., 84, 86.

[62] De Goncourt, "La Société Française pendant le Directoire," 298,
386.  Cf.  the Thé, the Grondeur, the Censeur des journaux, Paris, and
innumerable pamphlets.- In the provinces, the Anti-Terrorist, at
Toulouse the Neuf Thermidor, at Besançon, the Annales Troyennes at
Troyes, etc.

[63] Mallet-Dupan, II., 309, 316, 323, 324, 329, 333, 339, 347.  "To
defend themselves constitutionally, whilst the Directory attacks
revolutionarily, is to condemn themselves to inevitable perdition." -
" Had it a hundred times more ability the Legislative Corps without
boldness is a lightning flash without thunder." - " With greater
resources than Louis XVI.  had in 1792, the Legislative Corps acts
like this prince and will share his fate, unless it returns war for
war, unless it declares that the first generals who dare send out the
deliberations of their armies are traitors to the State." - " It is
owing to the temporizing of the legislative councils, to the fatal
postponement of the attack on the Luxembourg in the middle of August,
on which Pichegru, Villot, General Miranda and all the clairvoyant
deputies insisted on, .  .  .  .  it is owing to foolishly insisting
on confining themselves to constitutional defenses, .  .  .  it is
owing to the necessity which the eighty firm and energetic deputies
found of conciliating three hundred others who could not agree on the
end as well as the means, which brought about the catastrophe of the
Councils."

[64] Carnot, "Mémoires," II., 161.  "The evil having reached its last
stage, it was necessary to have a 10th of June instead of a 31st  of
May." - Mallet-Dupan, II., 333, 334.  The plan for canceling the
military division of the Interior under Augereau's command was to be
carried out between the 15th and 20th of August.  If the triumvirate
should resist, Pichegru and Villot were to march on the Luxembourg.
Carnot refused to accept the project "unless he might name the three
new Directors." - De la Rue, "Histoire du 18 Fructidor." Carnot said
to the Moderates who asked him to act with them: "Even if I had a
pardon in my pocket, amply confirmed by the royal mouth, I should have
no confidence."

[65] Occupied by the members of the Directory.

[66] Mathieu Dumas, "Mémoires," III., 113.

[67] Mallet-Dupan, II., 327.  "Barras is the only one who plays
squarely and who, taking the risk, wants Jacobinism to triumph par fas
et nefas." - Ibid., 339.  "The triumvirs hesitated up to Friday;
Barras, the most furious of the three, and master of Augereau, decided
his two colleagues." - Ibid, 351.  " Barras and Reubell, by dint of
exciting the imagination of that poor little philosophizer La
Révellière, succeeded in converting him." - Thibaudeau, II., 272.  "It
was Barras who bore off the honors of dictatorship that night .  .  .
.  La Révellière shut himself up in his house as in an impenetrable
sanctuary.  Reubell, at this moment, his head somewhat affected, was
watched in his apartment."

[68] Mallet-Dupan, II., 304, 305, 331.  - Carnot, II., 117.

[69] Barbé-Marbois, "Journal d'un Deporté," pp.34 and 35.

[70] Mallet-Dupan, II., 343.

[71] Barbé-Marbois, ibid., p.46.

[72] Mallet-Dupan, II., 228, 342.  "The use the triumvirs intended to
make of D'Entraigues' portfolio was known two months ago."- cf.
Thibaudeau, II., 279, on the vagueness, scanty proof and gross falsity
of the charges made by the Directory.

[73] Barbé-Marbois, ibid., p.46.

[74] Lord Malmesbury.  "Diary," III., 559 (Sep.  17th, 1797).  At
Lille, after the news of the coup d'état, "it was a curious
circumstance to see the horror that prevailed everywhere lest the
system of Terror should be revived.  People looked as if some
exterminating spirit were approaching.  The actors in the theatre
partook of the sensation.  The Director called Paris, said to Ross, on
his paying him: 'Nous allons actuellement être vandalisés.' "

[75] Decrees of Fructidor 18 and 19, year V., Article 39.

[76] Thibaudeau, II., 277.  "I went to the meeting of Fructidor 20,
the avenues of the Odéon were besieged with those subaltern agents of
revolution who always show themselves after commotion, like vultures
after battles.  They insulted and threatened the vanquished and lauded
the victors."

[77] Ibid., II.  309.

[78] Ibid., II., 277.  "As soon as I entered the hall several deputies
came with tears in their eyes to clasp me in their arms.  The Assembly
all had a lugubrious air, the same as the dimly lighted theatre in
which they met ; terror was depicted on all countenances; only a few
members spoke and took part in the debates.  The majority was
impassible, seeming to be there only to assist at a funeral spectacle,
its own."

[79] Decree of Fructidor 1, articles 4 and 5, 16 and 17, 28, 29 and
30, 35, and decree of Fructidor 22.-Sauzay, IX., 103.  Three hundred
communes of the department are thus purged after Fructidor.-Ibid.,
537, the same weeding-out of jurymen.

[80] Lacretelle, "Dix ans d'Epreuves," p.  310.

[81] "Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," 143.  (March 20, 1799.) "The
next day the primary assemblies began; very few attended them; nobody
seemed disposed to go out of his way to elect men whom they did not
like." - Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires," March, 1799.  "Persons who
are not dupes think it of very little consequence whether they vote or
not.  The elections are already made or indicated by the Directory.
The mass of the people show utter indifference.   (March 24.) "In this
town of twenty thousand souls (Blois) the primary assemblies are
composed of the dregs of the people only a very few honest people
attend them; 'suspects,' the relations of émigrés and priests, all
expelled, leave the field free to intriguers.  Not one proprietor is
summoned.  The terrorists rule in three out of the four sections.  .
.  The Babouvists always employ the same tactics; they recruit voters
in the streets who sell their sovereignty five or six times over for a
bottle of wine." (April 12, according to an intelligent man coming
from Paris.) "Generally, in Paris, nobody attends the primary
assemblies, the largest not returning two hundred voters." - Sauzay,
IX., ch.  83.  (Notes on the election at Besançon 1798, by an eye-
witness.) "Jacobins were elected by most frightful brigandage,
supported by the garrison to which wine had been distributed, their
election being made at the point of the bayonet and under blows with
sticks and swords.  A good many Catholics were wounded."

[82] Albert Babeau, II., 444.  (Declaration of the patriotic and
secessionist minority of the canton of Riquy at the elections of the
year VI.)

[83] Mercure Britannique, No.  for August 25, 1799.  (Report read,
July 15 and August 5, before the Five Hundred on the conduct of the
Directors Reubell, La Révellière-Lepaux, Merlin de Douai and
Treilhard, and summary of the nine articles of indictment.) - Ibid.,
3rd article.  "They have violated our constitution by usurping
legislative powers through acts which prescribe that a certain law
shall be executed, in all that is not modified to the present act, and
by passing acts which modify or render the present laws illusory."

[84] Fiévée, "Correspondance avec Buonaparte," I., 147.

[85] Barbé-Marbois, I., 64, 91, 96, 133; II., 18, 25, 83.  - Dufort de
Cheverney, "Mémoires.' (September 14, 1797.) - Sauzay, IX., chapters
81 and 84.

[86] Sauzay, vols.  IX.  and X.  - Mallet-Dupan, II., 375, 379, 382.
- Schmidt, "Tableau de Paris Pendant la Revolution," III., 290.
(Report by the administrators of the Seine department.)

[87] Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires," August, 1798, October, 1797 and
1799, passim.

[88] Archives Nationales, F.7, 3219.  (Letter of M. Alquier to the
First Consul, Pluviôse 18, year III.) "I wanted to see the central
administration; I found the ideas and language of 1793."

[89] Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires," (February 26, March 31 and
September 6, 1797).  "That poor theoristic imbecile, La Révellière-
Lepaux, who, joining Barras and Reubell against Barthélémy and Carnot,
made the 18th of Fructidor, and shut himself in his room so as not to
witness it, himself avows the quality of his staff." ("Memoires," II.,
164.) " The 18th of Fructidor necessitated numerous changes on the
part of the Directory.  Instead of putting republicans, but above all,
honest, wise and enlightened men in the place of the functionaries and
employees dismissed or revoked, the selections dictated by the new
Councils fell for the most part on anarchists and men of blood and
robbery."

[90] Lacretelle, "Dix ans d'épreuves," p.317.  A few days after
Fructidor, Robert, an old Jacobin, exclaimed with great joy on the
road to Brie-Comté, "All the royalists are going to be driven out or
guillotined!" The series F.7 in the Archives Nationales, contains
hundreds of files filled with reports "on the state of the public
mind," in each department, town or canton between the years III.  and
VIII.  I have given several months to their examination and, for lack
of space, cannot copy any extracts.  The real history of the last five
years of the Revolution may be found in these files.  Mallet-Dupan
gives a correct impression of it in his "Correspondance avec la cour
de Vienne," also in the "Mercure Britannique."

[91] Sauzay, X., chaps.  8o and 90.  - Ludovic Sciout, IV., ch.  17.
(See especially in Sauzay, X., pp.170 and 281, the instructions given
by Duval, December 16, 1796, and the circulars of François de
Neufchateau from November 20, 1798, down to June 18, 1798, each of
these pieces being a masterpiece in its way.

[92] "Journal d'un Bourgeois d'Evreux," p.134.  "June 7, 1798." "The
day following the décade, the gardeners, who as usual came to show
themselves off on the main street, were fined six livres for having
treated with contempt and broken the décade." January 21, 1799.
"Those who were caught working on the décade, were fined three livres
for the first offence if they were caught more than once the fine was
doubled and it was even followed by imprisonment"

[93] Ludovic Sciout, IV., 160.  Examples of "individual motives"
alleged to justify the sentence of transportation.  One has refused to
baptize an infant whose parents were only married civilly.  Another
has "declared to his audience that the catholic marriage was the
best." Another "has fanaticized." Another "has preached pernicious
doctrines contrary to the constitution." Another "may, by his
presence, incite disturbances," etc.  Among the condemned we find
septuagenarians, known priests and even married priests.  - Ibid.,
634, 637.

[94] Sauzay, IX., 715..  (List of names.)

[95] Ludovic Sciout, IV., 656.

[96] Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires," September 7, 1798.  - Ibid.,
February 26, 1799.  "In Belgium priests are lodged in the Carmelites
(convent)." September 9, 1799.  "Two more carts are sent full of
priests for the islands of Rhé and Oléron."

[97] Thibaudeau, II..  318, 321.  - Mallet-Dupan, II., 357, 368.  The
plan went farther: "All children of emigrants," or of those falsely
accused of being such, "left in France, shall be taken from their
relatives and confided to republican tutors, and the republic shall
administer their property."

[98] In reading about this Lenin and Stalin must have been inspired to
create their Goulags to which not only Russian and Estonian "petit
Bourgeois," but also other undesirable national groups were sent.
(SR.)

[99] Decree of Frimaire 9, year VI.  (Exceptions in favor of the
actual members of the Directory, ministers, military men on duty, and
the members of the diverse National Assemblies, except those who in
the constituent Assembly protested against the abolition of nobility.)
One of the speakers, a future count of the Empire, proposed that every
noble claiming his inscription on the civic registers should sign the
following declaration: "As man and as republican, I equally detest the
insolent superstition which pretends to distinctions of birth, and the
cowardly and shameful superstition which believes in and maintains
it."

[100] Decree of Fructidor 19, year II.

[101] Lally-Tollendal, "Défense des Emigrés," (Paris.  1797, 2nd part,
49, 62, 74.  Report of Portalis to the Council of Five Hundred, Feb.
18, 1796.  "Regard that innumerable class of unfortunates who have
never left the republican soil." - Speech by Dubreuil, Aug.26, 1796.
"The supplementary list in the department of Avignon bears 1004 or
1005 names.  And yet I can attest to you that there are not six names
on this enormous list justly put down as veritable emigrants."

[102] Ludovic Sciout, IV., 619.  (Report of the Yonne administration,
Frimaire, year VI.) "The gendarmerie went to the houses, in Sens as
well as Auxerre, of several of the citizens inscribed on the lists of
émigrés who were known never to have left their commune since the
Revolution began.  As they have not been found it is probable that
they have withdrawn into Switzerland, or that they are soliciting you
to have their names stricken off."

[103] Decrees of Vendémiaire 20 and Frimaire 9, year VI.  - Decree of
Messidor 10.

[104] Dufort de Cheverney, " Mémoires." (Before the Revolution he
enjoyed an income of fifty thousand livres, of which only five
thousand remain.) "Madame Amelot likewise reduced, rents her mansion
for a living.  Through the same delicacy as our own she did not avail
herself of the facility offered to her of indemnifying her creditors
with assignats." Another lady, likewise ruined, seeks a place in some
country house in order that herself and son may live." - "Statistique
de la Moselle," by Colchen, préfet, year VI.  "A great many people
with incomes have perished through want and through payment of
interest in paper-money and the reduction of Treasury bonds." - Dufort
de Cheverney, Ibid., March, 1799.  "The former noblesse and even
citizens who are at all well-off need not depend on any
amelioration....  They must expect a complete rescission of bodies and
goods....  Pecuniary resources are diminishing more and more....
Impositions are starving the country." - Mallet-Dupan, "Mercure
Britannique," January 25, 1799.  "Thousands of invalids with wooden
legs garrison the houses of the tax-payers who do not pay according to
the humor of the collectors.  The proportion of impositions as now
laid in relation to those of the ancient regime in the towns generally
is as 88 to 32."

[105] De Tocqueville, "uvres complètes," V., 65.  (Extracts from
secret reports on the state of the Republic, September 26, 1799.)

[106] Decree of Messidor 24, year VI.

[107] De Barante, "Histoire du Directoire," III., 456.

[108] A.  Sorel, " Revue Historique," No.1, for March and May, 1882.
"Les Frontières Constitutionelles en 1795." The treaties concluded in
1795 with Tuscany, Prussia and Spain show that peace was easy and that
the recognition of the Republic was effected even before the
Republican government was organized.  .  .  .  .  that France, whether
monarchical or republican, had a certain limit which French power was
not to overstep, because this was not in proportion to the real
strength of France, nor with the distribution of force among the other
European governments.  On this capital point the convention erred; it
erred knowingly, through a long-meditated calculation, which
calculation, however, was false.  and France paid dearly for its
consequences." - Mallet-Dupan, II., 288, Aug.  23, 1795.  "The
monarchists and many of the deputies in the Convention sacrificed all
the conquests to hasten on and obtain peace.  But the fanatical
Girondists and Siéyès' committee persisted in the tension system.
They were governed by three motives: 1, the design of extending their
doctrine along with their territory; 2, the desire of successively
federalizing the States of Europe with the French Republic; and 3,
that of prolonging a partial war which also prolongs extraordinary
powers and revolutionary resources." -- Carnot, "Mémoires," I., 476.
(Report to the Committee of Public Safety, Messidor 28, year II.) "It
seems much wiser to restrict our plans of aggrandizement to what is
purely necessary in order to obtain the maximum security of our
country." - Ibid., II., 132, 134 and 136.  (Letters to Bonaparte, Oct.
28, 1796, and Jan.  1, 1797.) "It would be imprudent to fan the
revolutionary flame in Italy too strongly .  .  .  .  They desired to
have you work out the Revolution in Piedmont, Milan, Rome and Naples;
I thought it better to treat with these countries, draw subsidies from
them, and make use of their own organization to keep them under
control."

[109] Carnot, ibid., II.  147.  "Barras, addressing me like a madman,
said, 'Yes, it is to you we owe that infamous treaty of Leoben!'"

[110] Andre Lebon, "L'Angleterre et l'Emigration Française," p.235.
(Letter of Wickam, June 27, 1797, words of Barthélemy to M.
d'Aubigny.)

[111] Lord Malmesbury, "Diary," III., 541.  (September 9, 1797.) "The
violent revolution which has taken place at Paris has upset all our
hopes and defeated all our reasoning.  I consider it the most unlucky
event that could have happened." Ibid., (Letter from Canning,
September 29, 1797.) " We were in a hair's breadth of it (peace).
Nothing but that cursed revolution at Paris and the sanguinary,
insolent, implacable and ignorant arrogance of the triumvirate could
have prevented us.  Had the moderate party triumphed all would have
been well, not for us only but for France, for Europe and for all the
world."

[112] Carnot, II., 152.  "Do you suppose, replied Reubell, that I want
the Cape and Trinquemale restored for Holland? The first point is to
take them, and to do that Holland must furnish the money and the
vessels.  After that I will make them see that these colonies belong
to us."

[113] Lord Malmesbury, " Diary," III., 526.  (Letter from Paris,
Fructidor 17, year V.) - ibid., 483.  (Conversation of Mr.  Ellis with
Mr.  Pain.)

[114] Ibid.  III., 519, 544.  (The words of Maret and Colchen.) - "
Reubell," says Carnot, "seems to be perfectly convinced that probity
and civism are two absolutely incompatible things."

[115] Mallet-Dupan, II., 49.  Words of Siéyès, March 27, 1797.  Ibid,
I., 258, 407; II., 4, 49, 350, 361, 386.  This is so true that this
prevision actuates the concessions of the English ambassador.  (Lord
Malmesbury, "Diary," III., 519.  Letter to Canning.  August 29, 1797.)
"I am the more anxious for peace because, in addition to all the
commonplace reasons, I am convinced that peace will paralyze this
country most completely, that all the violent means they have employed
for war will return upon them like an humour driven in and overset
entirely their weak and baseless constitution.  This consequence of
peace is so much more to be pressed, as the very best conditions we
could offer in the treaty."

[116] Mathieu Dumas, III., 256.  -  Miot de Melito, I., 163, 191.
(Conversations with Bonaparte June and September, 1797.)

[117] Mallet-Dupan, "Mercure Britannique," No.  for November 10, 1798.
How support gigantic and exacting crimes on its own soil? How can it
flatter itself that it will extract from an impoverished people,
without manufactures, trade or credit, nearly a billion of direct and
indirect subsidies? How renew that immense fund of confiscations on
which the French republic has lived for the past eight years? By
conquering every year a new nation and devastating its treasuries, its
character, its monts-de-piété, its owners of property.  The Republic,
for ten years past, would have laid down its arms had it been reduced
to its own capital.

[118] Mallet-Dupan, " Mercure Britannique," Nos.  for November 25, and
December 25, 1798, and passim.

[119] Ibid., No.  for January 25, 1799.  "The French Republic is
eating Europe leaf by leaf like the head of an artichoke." It
revolutionizes nations that it may despoil them, and it despoils them
that it may subsist."

[120] Letter of Mallet-Dupan to a deputy on a declaration of war
against Venice and on the Revolution effected at Genoa.  (The
"Quotidienne," Nos.  410, 413, 414, 421.) - Ibid., "Essai Historique
sur la destruction de le Signe et de le Liberté Historique." (Nos.  I,
2, and 3 of the " Mercure Britannique.") - Carnot, II., 153.  (Words
of Carnot in relation to the Swiss proceedings of the Directory.) "It
is the fable of the Wolf and the Lamb."

[121] Overhauling of the Constitution or the purging of the
authorities in Holland by Delacroix, January 22, 1798, in Cisalpine by
Berthier, February, 1798, by Trouve, August, 1798, by Brune,
September, 1798, in Switzerland by Rapinat, June, 1798, etc.

[122] Mallet-Dupan, ("Mercure Britannique." numbers for November 26.
December 25, 1798, March 10 and July 10, 1799).  Details and documents
relating to popular insurrections in Belgium, Switzerland, Suabia,
Modena, the Roman States.  Piedmont and Upper Italy.  - Letter of an
officer in the French army dated at Turin and printed at Paris.
"Wherever the civil commissioners pass the people rise in
insurrection, and, although I have come near being a victim of these
insurrections four times, I cannot blame the poor creatures; even the
straw of their beds is taken.  Most of Piedmont, as I wrote, has risen
against the French robbers, as they call us.  Will you be surprised
when I tell you that, since the pretended revolution of this country,
three or four months ago, we have devoured ten millions of coin,
fifteen millions of paper money, with the diamonds, furniture, etc.,
of the Crown? The people judge us according to our actions and regard
us with horror and execrations."

[123] Mallet-Dupan, Ibid., number for January, 1799.  (List according
to articles, with details, figures and dates.) - Ibid., No.  for May
25, 1799: details of the sack of Rome according to the "Journal" of M.
Duppa, an eye witness.  - Ibid., Nos.  for February 10 and 25, 1799:
details of spoliation in Switzerland, Lombardy, Lucca and Piedmont.  -
The following figures show the robberies committed by individuals: In
Switzerland, "the Directorial commissary, Rapinat, the major-general,
Schawembourg and the ordinance commissary, Rouhière, each carried away
a million tournois."  "Rouhière, besides this, levied 20 per cent.  on
each contract he issued, which was worth to him 350,000 livres.  His
first secretary Toussaint, stole in Berne alone, 150,000 livres.  The
secretary of Rapinat, Amberg, retired with 300,000 livres." General
Lorge carried off 150,000 livres in specie, besides a lot of gold
medals taken from the Hôtel-de-Ville at Berne; his two brigadier-
generals, Rampon and Pijon, each appropriated 216,000 livres.  "Gen.
Duheur, encamped in Brisgav, sent daily to the three villages at once
the bills of fare for his meals and ordered requisitions for them; he
demanded of one, articles in kind and, simultaneously, specie of
another.  He was content with 100 florins a day, which he took in
provisions and then in money." - " Massena, on entering Milan at
eleven o'clock in the evening, had carried off in four hours, without
giving any inventory or receipt, all the cash-boxes of the convents,
hospitals and monts-de-piété, which were enormously rich, taking also,
among others, the casket of diamonds belonging to Prince Belgiojoso.
That night was worth to Massena 1,200,000 livres." (Mallet-Dupan,
"Mercure Britannique," February 10, 1799, and "Journal," MS., March,
1797.) On the sentiments of the Italians, cf.  the letter of
Lieutenant Dupin, Prairial 27, year VIII.; (G.  Sand, "Histoire de ma
vie," II.  251) one account of the battle of Marengo, lost up to two
o'clock in the afternoon; "I already saw that the Po, and the Tessin
were to be crossed, a country to traverse of which every inhabitant is
our enemy."

[124] Mallet-Dupan, ibid., number for January 10 1791.  "December 31,
1796.  Marquis Litta had already paid assessments amounting to 500,000
livres milanais, Marquis T., 420,000, Count Grepi 900,000, and other
proprietors in proportion." Ransom of the "Decurioni of Milan, and
other hostages sent into France, 1,500,000 livres." -- This is in
conformity with the Jacobin theory.  In the old instructions of
Carnot, we read the following sentence: "Assessments must be laid
exclusively on the rich; the people must see that we are only
liberators....  Enter as benefactors of the people, and at the same
time as the scourge of the great, the rich and enemies of the French
name." (Carnot, I., 433.)

[125] Ludovic Sciout, IV., 776.  (Reports of the year VII., Archives
Nationales, F.7, 7701 and 7718.) "Out of 1,400 men composing the first
auxiliary battalion of conscripts, 1087 cowardly deserted their flag
(Haute-Loire), and out of 900 recently recruited at Puy, to form the
nucleus of the second battalion, 800 again have imitated their
example." - Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires," September, 1799.  "We
learned that out of 400 conscripts confined in the (Blois) chateau,
who were to set out that night, 100 had disappeared." - October 12,
1799: "The conscripts are in the château to the number of 5 or 600.
They say that they will not desert until out of the department and on
the road, so as not to compromise their families." - October 14, "200
have deserted, leaving about 300." - Archives Nationales, F.7, 3267.
(Reports every ten days on refractory conscripts or deserters arrested
by the military police, year VIII.  Department of Seine-et-Oise.) In
this department alone, there are 66 arrests in Vendémiaire, 136 in
Brumaire, 56 in Frimaire and 86 in Pluviôse .

[126] Mallet-Dupan, No.  for January 25, 1799.  (Letter from Belgium.)
"To-day we see a revolt like that which the United Provinces made
against the Duke of Alba.  Never have the Belgians since Philip II.
displayed similar motives for resistance and vengeance."

[127] Decrees of Fructidor 19, year VI.  and Vendémiaire 27, year VII.
- Mallet-Dupan, No.  for November 25, 1798.)

[128] M. Léonce de Lavergne ("Economie rurale de la France since
1789," p.38) estimates at a million the number of men sacrificed in
the wars between 1792 and 1800.  - "Trustworthy officials, who, a year
a go, have had the official documents in their possession, have
certified to me that the war statistics for the levying of troops
between 1794 and the middle of 1795 had raised 900,000 men of whom
650,000 had been lost in battle, in the hospitals or by desertion."
Mallet-Dupan.  (No.  for December 10, 1798.  - Ibid.  (No.  for March
20, 1799.) "Dumas affirmed that, in the Legislative Corps, the
National Guard had renewed the battalions of the defenders of the
country three times.  .  .  .  The fact of the shameful administration
of the hospitals is proved through the admissions of generals,
commissaries and deputies that the soldiers were dying for want of
food and medicine.  If we add to this the extravagance with which the
leaders of the armies let the me be killed, we can readily comprehend
this triple renewal in the space of seven years.  -  As an
illustration there was the village of four hundred and fifty
inhabitants in 1789 furnished (1792 and 1793) fifty soldiers.  ("
Histoire du Village de Croissy, Seine-et-Oise pendant la Revolution,"
by Campenon.).- La Vendée was a bottomless pit, like Spain and Russia
afterwards.  "A good republican, who entrusted with the supply the
Vendée army with provisions for fifteen months, assured me that out of
two hundred thousand men whom he had seen precipitated into this gulf
there were not ten thousand that came of it." (Meissner, "Voyage à
Paris," p.338, latter end of 1795) - The following figures
("Statistiques des Préfets" years IX., until XI.) are exact.  Eight
departments, (Doubs, Ain, Eure, Meurthe, Aisne, Aude, Drôme, Moselle)
furnish the total number of their volunteers, recruits and conscripts,
amounting to 193,343.  These three departments (Arthur Young, "Voyage
en France," II., 31) had, in 1790, a population of 2,446,000 souls:
the proportion indicates that out of 26 million Frenchmen a little
more than 2 millions were called up for military service.  - On the
other hand, five departments (Doubs, Eure, Meurthe, Aisne, Moselle)
gave, not only the number of their soldiers, 131,322, but likewise
that of their dead, 56,976, or out of 1000 men furnished 435 died.
This proportion shows 870,000 dead out of two million soldiers.

[129] The statistics of the prefects and reports of council-generals
of the year IX.  all agree in the statements of the notable diminution
of the masculine adult population.  - Lord Malmesbury had already made
the same observation in 1796.  ("Diary," October 21 and 23, 1796, from
Calais to Paris.) "Children and women were working in the fields.  Men
evidently reduced in number.  .  .  .  Carts often drawn by women and
most of them by old people or boys.  It is plain that the male
population has diminished; for the women we saw on the road surpassed
the number of men in the proportion of four to one." -- Wherever the
number of the population is filled up it is through the infantile and
feminine increase.  Nearly all the prefects and council-generals state
that precocious marriages have multiplied to excess through
conscription.  - Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires," September 1st, 1800.
" The conscription having spared the married, all the young men
married at the age of sixteen.  The number of children in the commune
is double and triple what it was formerly."

[130] Sauzay, X., 471.  (Speech by Representative Biot, Aug.29, 1799.)

[131] Albert Babeau, II., 466.  (Letter of Milany, July 1, 1798, and
report by Pout, Messidor, year VI.)

[132] Schmidt, III., 374.  (Reports on the situation of the department
of the Seine, Ventose, year VII.) - Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires,"
October 22, 1799.  "The column of militia sets out to-day; there are
no more than thirty persons in it, and these again are all paid or not
paid clerks, attachés of the Republic, all these belonging to the
department, to the director of domains, in fine, all the bureaus."

[133] Schmidt, III., 374.  (Reports on the situation of the department
of the Seine, Ventose, year VII.) - Dufort de Cheverney, "Mémoires,"
October 22, 1799.  "The column of militia sets out to-day; there are
no more than thirty persons in it, and these again are all paid or not
paid clerks, attachés of the Republic, all these belonging to the
department, to the director of domains, in fine, all the bureaus."

[134] M. de Lafayette, "Mémoires," II., 162.  (Letter of July 22,
1799.) "The other day, at the mass in St.  Roch, a man by the side of
our dear Grammont, said fervently: "My God, have mercy on us,
exterminate the nation !" This, indeed, simply meant: "My God, deliver
us from the Convention system!"

[135] Schmidt,298, 352, 377, 451, etc.  (Ventose, Frimaire and
Fructidor, year VII.)

[136] Ibid., III.  (Reports of Prairial, year III., department of the
Seine.)

[137] M. de Lafayette, "Memoires," II., 164.  (Letter of July 14,
1799.) - De Tocqueville, "(uvres complètes," V., 270.  (Testinony of
a contemporary.) - Sauzay, X., 470, 471.  (Speeches by Briot and de
Echassériaux): "I cannot understand the frightful state of torpor into
which minds have fallen; people have come to believing nothing, to
feeling nothing, to doing nothing .  .  .  .  The great nation which
had overcome all and created everything around her, seems to exist
only in the armies and in a few generous souls."

[138] Lord Malmesbury's "Diary," (November 5, 1796).  "At
Randonneau's, who published all the acts and laws .  .  .  .  Very
talkative, but clever .  .  .  .  Ten thousand laws published since
1789, but only seventy enforced."- Ludovic Sciout, IV., 770.  (Reports
of year VII.) In Puy de Dome: "Out of two hundred and eighty-six
communes there are two hundred in which the agents have committed
every species of forgery on the registers of the Etat-Civil and in the
copying of its acts, to clear individuals of military service.  Here,
young men of twenty and twenty-five are married to women of seventy-
two and eighty years of age, and even to those who have long been
dead; then, an extract from the death register clears a man who is
alive and well." - " Forged contracts are presented to avoid military
service, young soldiers are married to women of eighty; one woman,
thanks to a series of forgeries, is found married to eight or ten
conscripts." (Letter of an officer of the Gendarmerie to Roanne,
Ventose 9, year VIII.)

[139] Words of De Tocqueville.  - "Le Duc de Broglie," by M. Guizot,
p.  16.  (Words of the Duc de Broglie.) "Those who were not living at
this time could form no idea of the profound discouragement into which
France had fallen in the interval between Fructidor 18 and Brumaire
18."

[140] Buchez et Roux, XXXVIII., 480.  (Message of the Directory,
Floréal 13, year IV., and report of Bailleul, Floreal 18.) "When an
election of deputies presented a bad result to us we thought it our
duty to propose setting it aside.  .  .  .  It will be said that your
project is a veritable proscription." - "Not more so than the 19 of
Fructidor." - Cf.  for dismissals in the provinces, Sauzay, V., ch.
86.  - Albert Babeau, II., 486.  During the four years the Directory
lasted the municipal council of Troyes was renewed seven times, in
whole or in part.

[141] Buchez et Roux, XXXIX., 61.  (Session of Prairial 30, year
VII.)-Sauzay, X., ch.  87.  - Léouzon-Leduc, "Correspondence
Diplomatique avec la cour de Suede," P.  203.  - (Letters of July 1, 7
11, 19 August 4; September 23, 1799.) "The purification of
functionaries, so much talked about now, has absolutely no other end
in view but the removal of the partisans of one faction in order to
substitute those of another faction without any regard to moral
character.  .  .  .  It is this choice of persons without probity,
justice or any principles of honesty whatever for the most important
offices which makes one tremble, and especially, at this moment, all
who are really attached to their country." - "The opening of the clubs
must, in every relation, be deemed a disastrous circumstance.  .  .  .
All classes of society are panic-stricken at the faintest probability
of the re-establishment of a republican government copied after that
of 1793" .  .  .  .  The party of political incendiaries in France is
the only one which carries out such designs energetically and
directly."

[142] Leouzon-Leduc, ibid, 328, 329.  (Dispatches of September 19 and
23.) - Mallet-Dupan, "Mercure Britannique." (No.  for October 25,
1799.  Letter from Paris.  September 15.  Exposition of the situation
and tableau of the parties.) "I will add that the war waged with
success by the Directory against the Jacobins, (for, although the
Directory is itself a Jacobin production, it wants no more of its
masters), that this war, I say, has rallied people somewhat to the
government without having converted anyone to the Revolution or really
frightened the Jacobins who will pay them back if they have time to do
it."

[143] Gohier, "Mémoires," conversation with Sieyès on his entry into
the Directory.  "Here we are," says Sieyès to him, "members of a
government which, as we cannot conceal from ourselves, is threatened
with a coming fall.  But when the ice melts skilful pilots can escape
in the breaking up.  A falling government does not always imperil
those at the head of it."

[144] Tacitus, "Annales," book VI., § 50.   "Macro, intrepidus,
opprimi senem injectu mu1t vestis discedique a limine."

[145] Mallet-Dupan," Mercure Britannique." (Nos.  for December 25,
1798 and December 1799.) "From the very beginning of the Revolution,
there never was, in the uproar of patriotic protestations, amidst so
many popular effusions of devotion to the popular cause to Liberty in
the different parties, but one fundamental conception, that of
grasping power after having instituted it, of using every means of
strengthening themselves, and of excluding the largest number from it,
in order to center themselves in a privileged committee.  As soon as
they had hurried through the articles of their constitution and seized
the reins of government, the dominant party conjured the nation to
trust to it, notwithstanding that the farce of their reasoning would
not bring about obedience, .  .  .  Power and money and money and
power, all projects for guaranteeing their own heads and disposing of
those of their competitors, end in that.  From the agitators of 1789
to the tyrants of 1798, from Mirabeau to Barras, each labors only to
forcibly open the gates of riches and authority and to close them
behind them."

[146] Mallet-Dupan, ibid., No.  for April 10, 1799.  On the Jacobins.
"The sources of their enmities, the prime motive of their fury, their
coup-d'état lay in their constant mistrust of each other .  .  .  .
Systematic, immoral factionists, cruel through necessity and
treacherous through prudence, will always attribute perverse
intentions.  Carnot admits that there were not ten men in the
Convention that were conscious of probity."

[147] See in this respect "Histoire de ma Vie," by George Sand,
volumes 2, 3 and 4, the correspondence of her father enlisted as a
volunteer in 1798 and a lieutenant at Marengo.  - Cf.  Marshal
Marmont, "Memoires," I., 186, 282, 296, 304.  "Our ambition, at this
moment, was wholly secondary; we were occupied solely with our duties
or pleasures.  The most cordial and frankest union prevailed amongst
us all."

[148] "Journal de Marche du sergent Fracasse." - " Les Cahiers du
capitaine Coignet." - Correspondence of Maurice Dupin in "Histoire de
ma Vie," by George Sand.

[149] "Les Cahiers du Capitaine Coignet," p.76.  "And then we saw the
big gentlemen getting out of the windows.  Mantles, caps and feathers
lay on the floor and the grenadiers ripped off the lace." - Ibid., 78,
Narration by the grenadier Chome: " The pigeons all flew out of the
window and we had the hall to ourselves."

[150] Dufort de Cheverney, " Mémoires," September 1, 1800.
"Bonaparte, being fortunately placed at the head of the government,
advanced the Revolution more than fifty years; the cup of crimes was
full and overflowing.  He cut off the seven hundred and fifty heads of
the hydra, concentrated power in his own hands, and prevented the
primary assemblies from sending us another third of fresh scoundrels
in the place of those about to take themselves off.  .  .  .  Since I
stopped writing things are so changed as to make revolutionary events
appear as if they had transpired more than twenty years ago.  .  .  .
The people are no longer tormented on account of the decade, which is
no longer observed except by the authorities.  .  .  .  One can travel
about the country without a passport.  .  .  .  Subordination is
established among the troops; all the conscripts are coming back.  .
.  .  The government knows no party; a royalist is placed along with a
determined republican, each being, so to say, neutralized by the
other.  The First Consul, more a King than Louis XIV., has called the
ablest men to his councils without caring what they were." - Anne
Plumptre, "A Narrative of Three Years' Residence in France from 1802
to 1805," I., 326, 329.  "The class denominated the people is most
certainly, taking it in the aggregate, favorably disposed to
Bonaparte.  Any tale of distress from the Revolution was among this
class always ended with this, 'but now, we are quiet, thanks to God
and to Bonaparte.'" - Mallet-Dupan, with his accustomed perspicacity,
("Mercure Britainnique," Nos. for November 25 and December 10, 1799),
at once comprehended the character and harmony of this last
revolution.  "The possible domination of the Jacobins chilled all ages
and most conditions.  .  .  .  Is that nothing, to be preserved, even
for one year, against the ravages of a faction, under whose empire
nobody can sleep tranquilly, and find that faction driven from all
places of authority just at a time when everybody feared its second
outburst, with its torches, its assassins, its assessors, and its
agrarian laws, over the whole French territory?....  That Revolution,
of an entirely new species, appeared to us as fundamental as that of
1789.

[151] The Ancient Régime, p.  144.







End of The French Revolution, Volume 3
Please note that all references to earlier Volumes of the Origines of Contemporary France are to the American edition. Since there are no fixed page numbers in the Gutenberg edition these page numbers are only approximate. (SR).
