Project Gutenberg's Etext History of Friedrich II of Prussia V 6
#12 in our series by Thomas Carlyle
V6 of 21


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


History of Friedrich II of Prussia V 6

by Thomas Carlyle

March, 2000  [Etext #2106]


Project Gutenberg's Etext History of Friedrich II of Prussia V 6
*******This file should be named 06frd10.txt or 06frd10.zip*******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 06frd11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 06frd10a.txt


Prepared by D.R. Thompson <drthom@ihug.co.nz>


Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*






Prepared by D.R. Thompson <drthom@ihug.co.nz>





Carlyle's "History of Friedrich II of Prussia"




BOOK VI.

DOUBLE-MARRIAGE PROJECT, AND CROWN-PRINCE,
GOING ADRIFT UNDER THE STORM-WINDS.

1727-1730.

Chapter I.

FIFTH CRISIS IN THE KAISER'S SPECTRE-HUNT.

The Crown-Prince's young Life being, by perverse chance, involved
and as it were absorbed in that foolish question of his English
Marriage, we have nothing for it but to continue our sad function;
and go on painfully fishing out, and reducing to an authentic
form, what traces of him there are, from that disastrous beggarly
element,--till once he get free of it, either dead or alive.
The WINDS (partly by Art-Magic) rise to the hurricane pitch, upon
this Marriage Project and him; and as for the sea, or general tide
of European Politics--But let the reader look with his own eyes.

In the spring of 1727, War, as anticipated, breaks out; Spaniards
actually begin battering at Gibraltar; Kaiser's Ambassador at
London is angrily ordered to begone. Causes of war were many:
1. Duke de Ripperda--tumbled out now, that illustrious diplomatic
bulldog, at Madrid--sought asylum in the English Ambassador's
house; and no respect was had to such asylum: that is one cause.
2. Then, you English, what is the meaning of these war-fleets in
the West Indies; in the Mediterranean, on the very coast of Spain?
We demand that you at once take them home again:--which cannot be
complied with. 3. But above all things, we demand Gibraltar of
you:--which can still less be complied with. Termagant Elizabeth
has set her heart on Gibraltar: that, in such opportunity as this
unexpected condition of the Balances now gives her, is the real
cause of the War.

Cession of Gibraltar: there had been vague promises, years ago, on
the Kaiser's part; nay George himself, raw to England at that
date, is said to have thought the thing might perhaps be done.--
Do it at once, then!" said the Termagant Queen, and repeated, with
ever more emphasis;--and there being not the least compliance, she
has opened parallels before the place, and begun war and ardent
firing there; [22d February, 1727 (Scholl, ii. 212). Salmon,
<italic> Chronological Historian <end italic> (London, 1747;
a very incorrect dark Book, useful only in defect of better),
ii. 173. Coxe, <italic> Memoirs of Walpole, <end italic> i. 260,
261; ii. 498-515.] preceded by protocols, debates in Parliament;
and the usual phenomena. It is the Fifth grand Crisis in the
Kaiser's spectre-huntings; fifth change in the color of the
world-lobster getting boiled in that singular manner;--Second
Sputter of actual War.

Which proved futile altogether; and amounts now, in the human
memory; to flat zero,--unless the following infinitesimally small
fraction be countable again:--

"Sputtering of War; that is to say, Siege of Gibraltar. A siege
utterly unmemorable, and without the least interest, for existing
mankind with their ungrateful humor,--if it be not; once more,
that the Father of TRISTRAM SHANDY was in it: still a Lieutenant
of foot, poor fellow; brisk, small, hot-tempered, loving, 'liable
to be cheated ten times a day if nine will not suffice you.'
He was in this Siege; shipped to the Rock to make stand there;
and would have done so with the boldest,--only he got into duel
(hot-tempered, though of lamb-like innocence), and was run through
the body; not entirely killed, but within a hair's breadth of it;
and unable for service while this sputtering went on. Little Lorry
is still living; gone to school in Yorkshire, after pranks enough,
and misventures,--half-drowning 'in the mill-race at Annamoe in
Ireland,' for one. [Laurence Sterne's <italic> Autobiography <end
italic> (cited above).] The poor Lieutenant Father died,
soldiering in the West Indies; soon after this; and we shall not
mention him again. But History ought to remember that he is 'Uncle
Toby,' this poor Lieutenant, and take her measures!--The Siege of
Gibraltar, we still see with our eyes, was in itself Nothing."

Truly it might well enough have grown to universal flame of War.
But this always needs two parties; and pacific George would not be
second party in it. George, guided by pacific Walpole, backed by
pacific Fleury, answers the ardent firing by phlegmatic patience
and protocolling; not by counter-firing, except quite at his
convenience, from privateers, from war-ships here and there, and
in sulky defence from Gibraltar itself. Probably the Termagant,
with all the fire she has, will not do much damage upon Gibraltar?
Such was George's hope. Whereby the flame of war, ardent only in
certain Spanish batteries upon the point of San Roque, does not
spread hitherto,--though all mortals, and Friedrich Wilhelm as
much as any, can see the imminent likelihood there is. In such
circumstances, what a stroke of policy to have disjoined Friedrich
Wilhelm from the Hanover Alliance, and brought him over to our
own! Is not Grumkow worth his pension? "Grumkow serves honorably."
Let the invaluable Seckendorf persevere.


CROWN-PRINCE SEEN IN DRYASDUST'S GLASS, DARKLY.

To know the special figure of the Crown-Prince's way of life in
those years, who his friends, companions were, what his pursuits
and experiences, would be agreeable to us; but beyond the outline
already given, there is little definite on record. He now resides
habitually at Potsdam, be the Court there or not; attending
strictly to his military duties in the Giant Regiment; it is only
on occasion, chiefly perhaps in "Carnival time," that he gets to
Berlin, to partake in the gayeties of society. Who his associates
there or at Potsdam were? Suhm, the Saxon Resident, a cultivated
man of literary turn, famed as his friend in time coming, is
already at his diplomatic post in Berlin, post of difficulty just
now; but I know not whether they have yet any intimacy. [Preuss,
<italic> Friedrich mit seinen Verwandten und Freunden, p. 24.]
This we do know, the Crown-Prince begins to be noted for his
sprightly sense, his love of literature, his ingenuous ways;
in the Court or other circles, whatsoever has intelligence
attracts him, and is attracted by him. The Roucoulles Soirees,--
gone all to dim backram for us, though once so lively in their
high periwigs and speculations,--fall on Wednesday. When the
Finkenstein or the others fall,--no doubt his Royal Highness
knows it. In the TABAKS-COLLEGIUM, there also, driven by duty, he
sometimes appears; but, like Seckendorf and some others, he only
affects to smoke, and his pipe is mere white clay. Nor is the
social element, any more than the narcotic vapor which prevails
there, attractive to the young Prince,--though he had better hide
his feelings on the subject.

Out at Potsdam, again, life goes very heavy; the winged Psyche
much imprisoned in that pipe-clay element, a prey to vacancy and
many tediums and longings. Daily return the giant drill-duties;
and daily, to the uttermost of rigorous perfection, they must be
done:--"This, then, is the sum of one's existence, this?"
Patience, young "man of genius," as the Newspapers would now call
you; it is indispensably beneficial nevertheless! To swallow one's
disgusts, and do faithfully the ugly commanded work, taking no
council with flesh and blood: know that "genius," everywhere in
Nature, means this first of all; that without this, it means
nothing, generally even less. And be thankful for your Potsdam
grenadiers and their pipe-clay!--

Happily he has his Books about him; his flute: Duhan, too, is
here, still more or less didactic in some branches;
always instructive and companionable, to him.
The Crown-Prince reads a great deal; very many French Books, new
and old, he reads; among the new, we need not doubt, the <italic>
Henriade <end italic> of M. Arouet Junior (who now calls himself
VOLTAIRE), which has risen like a star of the first magnitude in
these years. [London, 1723, in surreptitious incomplete state,
<italic> La Ligue <end italic> the title; then at length, London,
1726, as <italic> Henriade, <end italic> in splendid 4to,--by
subscription (King, Prince and Princess of Wales at the top of
it), which yielded 8,000 pounds: see Voltaire, <italic> OEuvres
Completes, <end italic> xiii. 408.] An incomparable piece,
patronized by Royalty in England; the delight of all kindred
Courts. The light dancing march of this new "Epic," and the brisk
clash of cymbal music audible in it, had, as we find afterwards,
greatly captivated the young man. All is not pipe-clay, then, and
torpid formalism; aloft from the murk of commonplace rise
glancings of a starry splendor, betokening--oh, how much!

Out of Books, rumors and experiences, young imagination is forming
to itself some Picture of the World as it is, as it has been.
The curtains of this strange life-theatre are mounting, mounting,
--wondrously as in the case of all young souls; but with what
specialties, moods or phenomena of light and shadow, to this young
soul, is not in any point recorded for us. The "early Letters to
Wilhelmina, which exist in great numbers," from these we had hoped
elucidation: but these the learned Editor has "wholly withheld as
useless," for the present. Let them be carefully preserved, on the
chance of somebody's arising to whom they may have uses!--

The worst feature of these years is Friedrich Wilhelm's discontent
with them. A Crown-Prince sadly out of favor with Papa. This has
long been on the growing hand; and these Double-Marriage troubles,
not to mention again the new-fangled French tendencies (BLITZ
FRANZOSEN!), much aggravate the matter, and accelerate its rate of
growth. Already the paternal countenance does not shine upon him;
flames often; and thunders, to a shocking degree;--and worse days
are coming.



Chapter II.

DEATH OF GEORGE I.

Gibraltar still keeps sputtering; ardent ineffectual bombardment
from the one side, sulky, heavy blast of response now and then
from the other: but the fire does not spread; nor will, we may
hope. It is true, Sweden and Denmark have joined the Treaty of
Hanover, this spring; and have troops on foot, and money paid
them; But George is pacific; Gibraltar is impregnable; let the
Spaniards spend their powder there.

As for the Kaiser, he is dreadfully poor; inapt for battle
himself. And in the end of this same May, 1727, we hear, his
principal ally, Czarina Catherine, has died;--poor brown little
woman, Lithuanian housemaid, Russian Autocrat, it is now all one;
--dead she, and can do nothing. Probably the Kaiser will sit
still? The Kaiser sits still; with eyes bent on Gibraltar, or
rolling in graud Imperial inquiry and anxiety round the world;
war-outlooks much dimmed for him since the end of May.

Alas, in the end of June, what far other Job's-post is this that
reaches Berlin and Queen Sophie? That George I., her royal Father,
has suddenly sunk dead! With the Solstice, or Summer pause of the
Sun, 21st or 22d June, almost uncertain which, the Majesty of
George I. did likewise pause,--in his carriage, on the road to
Osnabruck,--never to move more. Whereupon, among the simple
People, arose rumors of omens, preternaturalisms, for and against:
How his desperate Megaera of a Wife, in the act of dying, had
summoned him (as was presumable), to appear along with her at the
Great Judgment-Bar within year and day; and how he has here done
it. On the other hand, some would have it noted, How "the
nightingales in Herrenhausen Gardens had all ceased singing for
the year, that night he died,"--out of loyalty on the part of
these little birds, it seemed presumable. [See Kohler, <italic>
Munzbelustigungen, <end italic> x. 88.]

What we know is, he was journeying towards Hanover again, hopeful
of a little hunting at the Gorhde; and intended seeing Osnabruck
and his Brother the Bishop there, as he passed. That day, 21st
June, 1727, from some feelings of his own, he was in great haste
for Osnabruck; hurrying along by extra-post, without real cause
save hurry of mind. He had left his poor old Maypole of a Mistress
on the Dutch Frontier, that morning, to follow at more leisure.
He was struck by apoplexy on the road,--arm fallen powerless,
early in the day, head dim and heavy; obviously an alarming case.
But he refused to stop anywhere; refused any surgery but such as
could be done at once. "Osnabruck! Osnabruck!" he reiterated,
growing visibly worse. Two subaltern Hanover Officials,
"Privy-Councillor von Hardenberg, KAMMERHERR (Chamberlain) von
Fabrice, were in the carriage with him;" [Gottfried, <italic>
Historische Chronik <end italic> (Frankfurt, 1759), iii. 872.
Boyer, <italic> The Political State of Great Britain, <end italic>
vol. xxxiii. pp. 545, 546.] King chiefly dozing, and at last
supported in the arms of Fabrice, was heard murmuring, "C'EST FAIT
DE MOI ('T is all over with me)!" And "Osnabruck! Osnabruck!"
slumberously reiterated he: To Osnabruck, where my poor old
Brother, Bishop as they call him, once a little Boy that trotted
at my knee with blithe face, will have some human pity on me!
So they rushed along all day, as at the gallop, his few attendants
and he; and when the shades of night fell, and speech had now left
the poor man, he still passionately gasped some gurgle of a sound
like "Osnabruck;" --hanging in the arms of Fabrice, and now
evidently in the article of death. What a gallop, sweeping through
the slumber of the world: To Osnabruck, Osnabruck!

In the hollow of the night (some say, one in the morning), they
reach Osnabruck. And the poor old Brother,--Ernst August, once
youngest of six brothers, of seven children, now the one survivor,
has human pity in the heart of him full surely. But George is
dead; careless of it now. [Coxe (i. 266) is "indebted to his
friend Nathaniel Wraxall" for these details,--the since famous Sir
Nathaniel, in whose <italic> Memoirs <end italic> (vague, but NOT
mendacious, not unintelligent) they are now published more at
large. See his <italic> Memoirs of the Courts of Berlin, Dresden,
<end italic> &c. (London. 1799), i. 35-40; also <italic>
Historical Memoirs <end italic> (London, 1836), iv. 516-518.]
After sixty-seven years of it, he has flung his big burdens,--
English crowns, Hanoverian crownlets, sulkinesses, indignations,
lean women and fat, and earthly contradictions and confusions,--
fairly off him; and lies there.

The man had his big burdens, big honors so called, absurd enough
some of them, in this world; but he bore them with a certain
gravity and discretion: a man of more probity, insight and general
human faculty than he now gets credit for. His word was sacred to
him. He had the courage of a Welf, or Lion-Man; quietly royal in
that respect at least. His sense of equity, of what was true and
honorable in men and things, remained uneffaced to a respectable
degree; and surely it had resisted much. Wilder puddle of muddy
infatuations from without and from within, if we consider it
well,--of irreconcilable incoherences, bottomless universal
hypocrisies, solecisms bred with him and imposed on him,--few sons
of Adam had hitherto lived in.

He was, in one word, the first of our Hanover Series of English
Kings; that hitherto unique sort, who are really strange to look
at in the History of the World. Of whom, in the English annals,
there is hitherto no Picture to be had; nothing but an empty blur
of discordant nonsenses, and idle, generally angry, flourishings
of the pen, by way of Picture. The English Nation, having flung
its old Puritan, Sword-and-Bible Faith into the cesspool,--or
rather having set its old Bible-Faith, MINUS any Sword, well up in
the organ-loft, with plenty of revenue, there to preach and organ
at discretion, on condition always of meddling with nobody's
practice farther,--thought the same (such their mistake) a mighty
pretty arrangement; but found it hitch before long. They had to
throw out their beautiful Nell-Gwynn Defenders of the Faith;
fling them also into the cesspool; and were rather at a loss what
next to do. "Where is our real King, then? Who IS to lead us
Heavenward, then; to rally the noble of us to him, in some small
measure, and save the rest and their affairs from running
Devilward?"--The English Nation being in some difficulty as to
Kings, the English Nation clutched up the readiest that came to
hand; "Here is our King!" said they,--again under mistake, still
under their old mistake. And, what was singular, they then avenged
themselves by mocking, calumniating, by angrily speaking, writing
and laughing at the poor mistaken King so clutched!--It is high
time the English were candidly asking themselves, with very great
seriousness indeed, WHAT it was they had done, in the sight of God
and man, on that and the prior occasion? And above all, What it is
they will now propose to do in the sequel of it! Dig gold-nuggets,
and rally the IGnoble of us?--

George's poor lean Mistress, coming on at the usual rate of the
road, was met, next morning, by the sad tidings. She sprang from
her carriage into the dusty highway; tore her hair (or headdress),
half-frantic; declared herself a ruined woman; and drove direct to
Berlin, there to compose her old mind. She was not ill seen at
Court there; had her connections in the world. Fieldmarshal
Schulenburg, who once had the honor of fighting (not to his
advantage) with Charles XII., and had since grown famous by his
Anti-Turk performances in the Venetian service, is a Brother of
this poor Maypole's; and there is a Nephew of hers, one of
Friedrich Wilhelm's Field-Officers here, whom we shall meet by and
by. She has been obliging to Queen Sophie on occasions; they can,
and do, now weep heartily together. I believe she returned to
England, being Duchess of Kendal, with heavy pensions there;
and "assiduously attended divine ordinances, according to the
German Protestant form, ever afterwards." Poor foolish old soul,
what is this world, with all its dukeries!--

The other or fat Mistress, "Cataract of fluid Tallow," Countess of
Darlington, whom I take to have been a Half-Sister rather, sat
sorrowful at Isleworth; and kept for many years a Black Raven,
which had come flying in upon her; which she somehow understood to
be the soul, or connected with the soul, of his Majesty of happy
memory. [Horace Walpole, <italic> Reminiscences. <end italic>]
Good Heavens, what fat fluid-tallowy stupor, and entirely sordid
darkness, dwells among mankind; and occasionally finds itself
lifted to the very top, by way of sample!--

Friedrich Wilhelm wept tenderly to Brigadier Dubourgay, the
British Minister at Berlin (an old military gentleman, of
diplomatic merit, who spells rather ill), when they spoke of
this sad matter. My poor old Uncle; he was so good to me in
boyhood, in those old days, when I blooded Cousin George's nose!
Not unkind, ah, only proud and sad; and was called sulky, being of
few words and heavy-laden. Ah me, your Excellenz; if the little
nightingales have a11 fallen silent, what may not I, his Son and
sephew, do?--And the rugged Majesty blubbered with great
tenderness; having fountains of tears withal, hidden in the rocky
heart of him, not suspected by every one. [Dubourgay's Despatches,
in the State-Paper Office.]

I add only that the Fabrice, who had poor George in his arms that
night, is a man worth mentioning. The same Fabrice (Fabricius, or
perhaps GOLDSCHMIDT in German) who went as Envoy from the
Holstein-Gottorp people to Charles XII. in his Turkish time;
and stayed with his Swedish Majesty there, for a year or two,
indeed till the catastrophe came. His Official LETTERS from that
scene are in print, this long while, though considerably
forgotten; [<italic> Anecdotes du Sejour du Roi de Suide a Bender,
ou Lettres de M. le Baron de Fabrice pour servir d'elaircissement
a l'Histoire de Charles XII. <end italic> (Hambourg, 1760, 8vo).]
a little Volume, worth many big ones that have been published on
that subject. The same Fabrice, following Hanover afterwards, came
across to London in due course; and there he did another memorable
thing: made acquaintance with the Monsieur Arouet, then a young
French Exile there, Arouet Junior ("LE JEUNE or L. J."), who,--
by an ingenious anagram, contrived in his indignation at such
banishment,--writes himself VOLTAIRE ever since; who has been
publishing a HENRIADE, and doing other things. Now it was by
questioning this Fabrice, and industriously picking the memory of
him clean, that M. de Voltaire wrote another book, much more of an
"Epic" than Henri IV.,--a HISTORY, namely, OF CHARLES XII.; [See
Voltaire, <italic> OEuvres Completes, ii. 149, xxx. 7, 127.
Came out in 1731 (ib. xxx. Avant-Propos, p. ii).] which seems to
me the best-written of all his Books, and wants nothing but TRUTH
(indeed a dreadful want) to make it a possession forever.
VOLTAIRE, if you want fine writing; ADLERFELD and FABRICE, if you
would see the features of the Fact: these three are still the
Books upon Charles XII.


HIS PRUSSIAN MAJESTY FALLS INTO ONE OF HIS HYPOCHONDRIACALFITS.

Before this event, his Majesty was in gloomy humor; and special
vexations had superadded themselves. Early in the Spring, a
difficult huff of quarrel, the consummation of a good many grudges
long subsisting, had fallen out with his neighbor of Saxony, the
Majesty of Poland, August, whom we have formerly heard of, a
conspicuous Majesty in those days; called even "August the Great"
by some persons in his own time; but now chiefly remembered by his
splendor of upholstery, his enormous expenditure in drinking and
otherwise, also by his three hundred and fifty-four Bastards
(probably the maximum of any King's performance in that line), and
called August DER STARKE, "August the Physically Strong."
This exemplary Sovereign could not well be a man according to
Friedrich Wilhelm's heart: accordingly they had their huffs and
little collisions now and then: that of the Protestant Directorate
and Heidelberg Protestants, for instance; indeed it was generally
about Protestantism; and more lately there had been high words and
correspondings about the "Protestants of Thorn" (a bad tragedy, of
Jesuit intrusion and Polish ferocity, enacted there in 1724);
[Account of it in Buchholz, i. 98-102.]--in which sad business
Friedrich Wilhelm loyally interfered, though Britannic George of
blessed memory and others were but lukewarm; and nothing could be
done in it. Nothing except angry correspondence with King August;
very provoking to the poor soul, who had no hand but a nominal
one in the Thorn catastrophe, being driven into it by his unruly
Diet alone.

In fact, August, with his glittering eyes and excellent physical
constitution, was a very good-humored fellow; supremely pleasant
in society; and by no means wishful to cheat you, or do you a
mischief in business,--unless his necessities compelled him;
which often were great. But Friedrich Wilhelm always kept a good
eye on such points; and had himself suffered nothing from the gay
eupeptic Son of Belial, either in their old Stralsund copartnery
or otherwise. So that, except for these Protestant affairs,--and
alas, one other little cause,--Friedrich Wilhelm had contentedly
left the Physically Strong to his own course, doing the civilities
of the road to him when they met; and nothing ill had fallen out
between them. This other little cause--alas, it is the old story
of recruiting; one's poor Hobby again giving offence!
Special recruiting brabbles there had been; severe laws passed in
Saxony about these kidnapping operations: and always in the Diets,
when question rose of this matter, August had been particularly
loud in his denouncings. Which was unkind, though not unexpected.
But now, in the Spring of 1727, here has a worse case than
any arisen.

Captain Natzmer, of I know not what Prussian Regiment,
"Sachsen-Weimar Cuirassiers" [<italic> Militair-Lexikon, <end
italic> iii. 104.] or another, had dropt over into Saxony, to see
what could be done in picking up a tall man or two. Tall men, one
or two, Captain Natzmer did pick up, nay a tall deserter or two
(Saxon soldier, inveigled to desert); but finding his operations
get air, he hastily withdrew into Brandenburg territory again.
Saxon Officials followed him into Brandenburg territory; snapt
him back into Saxon; tried him by Saxon law there;--Saxon law,
express in such case, condemns him to be hanged; and that is his doom accordingly.

"Captain Natzmer to swing on the gallows? Taken on Brandenburg
territory too, and not the least notice given me?" Friedrich
Wilhelm blazes into flaming whirlwind; sends an Official
Gentleman, one Katsch, to his Excellenz Baron von Suhm (the
Crown-Prince's cultivated friend), with this appalling message:
"If Natzmer be hanged, for certain I will use reprisals;
you yourself shall swing!" Whereupon Suhm, in panic, fled over the
marches to his Master; who bullied him for his pusillanimous
terrors; and applied to Friedrich Wilhelm, in fine frenzy of
indignant astonishment, "What, in Heaven's name, such meditated
outrage on the law of nations, and flat insult to the Majesty of
Kings, can have meant?" Friedrich Wilhelm, the first fury being
spent, sees that he is quite out of square; disavows the reprisals
upon Suhm. "Message misdelivered by my Official Gentleman, that
stupid Katsch; never did intend to hang Suhm; oh, no;" with much
other correspondence; [In Mauvillon (ii. 189-195) more of it than
any one will read.]--and is very angry at himself, and at the
Natzmer affair, which has brought him into this bad pass.
Into open impropriety; into danger of an utter rupture, had King
August been of quarrelsome turn. But King August was not
quarrelsome; and then Seckendorf and the Tobacco-Parliament,--on
the Kaiser's score, who wants Pragmatic Sanction and much else out
of these two Kings, and can at no rate have them quarrel in the
present juncture,--were eager to quench the fire. King August let
Natzmer go; Suhm returned to his post; [Pollnitz, ii. 254.] and
things hustled themselves into some uneasy posture of silence
again;--uneasy to the sensitive fancy of Friedrich Wilhelm above
all. This is his worst collision with his Neighbor of Saxony;
and springing from one's Hobby again!--

These sorrows, the death of George I., with anxieties as to George
II. and the course he might take; all this, it was thought, preyed
upon his Majesty's spirits;--Wilhelmina says it was "the frequent
carousals with Seckendorf," and an affair chiefly of the royal
digestive-apparatus. Like enough;--or both might combine. It is
certain his Majesty fell into one of his hypochondrias at this
time; talked of "abdicating" and other gloomy things, and was very
black indeed. So that Seckendorf and Grumkow began to be alarmed.
It is several months ago he had Franke the Halle Methodist giving
ghostly counsel; his Majesty ceased to have the Newspapers read at
dinner; and listened to lugubrious Franke's exhortations instead.
Did English readers ever hear of Franke? Let them make a momentary
acquaintance with this famous German Saint. August Hermann Franke,
a Lubeck man, born 1663; Professor of Theology, of Hebrew,
Lecturer on the Bible; a wandering, persecuted, pious man.
Founder of the "Pietists," a kind of German Methodists, who are
still a famed Sect in that country; and of the WAISENHAUS, at
Halle, grand Orphan-house, built by charitable beggings of Franke,
which also still subsists. A reverend gentleman, very mournful of
visage, now sixty-four; and for the present, at Berlin,
discoursing of things eternal, in what Wilhelmina thinks a very
lugubrious manner. Well; but surely in a very serious manner!
The shadows of death were already round this poor Franke; and in
a few weeks more, he had himself departed. [Died 8th June, 1727.]
But hear Wilhelmina, what account she gives of her own and the
young Grenadier-Major's behavior on these mournful occasions.
Seckendorf's dinners she considers to be the cause;
all spiritual, sorrows only an adjunct not worth mentioning.
It is certain enough.

"His Majesty began to become valetudinary; and the hypochondria
which tormented him rendered his humor very melancholy.
Monsieur Franke, the famous Pietist, founder of the Orphan-house
at Halle University, contributed not a little to exaggerate that
latter evil. This reverend gentleman entertained the King by
raising scruples of conscience about the most innocent matters.
He condemned all pleasures; damnable all of them, he said, even
hunting and music. You were to speak of nothing but the Word of
God only; all other conversation was forbidden. It was always he
that carried on the improving talk at table; where he did the
office of reader, as if it had been a refectory of monks. The King
treated us to a sermon every afternoon; his valet-de-chambre gave
out a psalm, which we all sang; you had to listen to this sermon
with as much devout attention as if it had been an apostle's.
My Brother and I had all the mind in the world to laugh;
we tried hard to keep from laughing; but often we burst out.
Thereupon reprimand, with all the anathemas of the Church hurled
out on us; which we had to take with a contrite penitent air, a
thing not easy to bring your face to at the moment. In a word,
this dog of a Franke [he died within few months, poor soul, CE
CHIEN DE FRANKE] led us the life of a set of Monks of La Trappe.

"Such excess of bigotry awakened still more gothic thoughts in the
King. He resolved to abdicate the crown in favor of my Brother.
He used to talk, He would reserve for himself 10,000 crowns a
year; and retire with the Queen and his Daughters to Wusterhausen.
There, added he, I will pray to God; and manage the farming
economy, while my wife and girls take care of the household
matters. You are clever, he said to me; I will give you the
inspection of the linen, which you shall mend and keep in order,
taking good charge of laundry matters. Frederika [now thirteen,
married to ANSPACH two years hence], who is miserly, shall have
charge of all the stores of the house. Charlotte [now eleven,
Duchess of BRUNSWICK by and by] shall go to market and buy our
provisions; and my Wife shall take charge of the little children,
[says Friedrich Wilhelm], and of the kitchen." [Little children
are: 1. Sophie Dorothee, now eight, who married Margraf of
Schwedt, and was unhappy; 2. Ulrique, a grave little soul of
seven, Queen of Sweden afterwards; 3. August Wilhelm, age now
five, became Father of a new Friedrich Wilhelm, who was King by
and by, and produced the Kings that still are; 4. Amelia, now
four, born in the way we saw; and 5. HENRI, still in arms, just
beginning to walk. There will be a Sixth and no more (son of this
Sixth, a Berlin ROUE was killed, in 1806, at the Battle of Jena,
or a day or two before); but the Sixth is not yet come to hand.]

Poor Friedrich Wilhelm; what an innocent IDYLLIUM;--which cannot
be executed by a King. "He had even begun to work at an
Instruction, or Farewell Advice, for my Brother;" and to point
towards various steps, which alarmed Grumkow and Seckendorf to a
high degree." [Wilhelmina, <italic> Memoires de Bareith, <end
italic> i. 108.]

"Abdication," with a Crown-Prince ready to fall into the arms of
England, and a sudden finis to our Black-Art, will by no means
suit Seckendorf and Grumkow! Yet here is Winter coming;
solitary Wusterhausen, with the misty winds piping round it, will
make matters worse: something must be contrived; and what?
The two, after study, persuade Fieldmarshal Flemming over at
Warsaw (August the Strong's chief man, the Flemming of Voltaire's
CHARLES XII.; Prussian by birth, though this long while in Saxon
service), That if he the Fieldmarshal were to pay, accidentally,
as it were, a little visit to his native Brandenburg just now, it
might have fine effects on those foolish Berlin-Warsaw clouds that
had risen. The Fieldmarshal, well affected in such a case, manages
the little visit, readily persuading the Polish Majesty;
and dissipates the clouds straightway,--being well received by
Friedrich Wilhelm, and seconded by the Tobacco-Parliament with all
its might. Out at Wusterhausen everything is comfortably settled.
Nay Madam Flemming, young, brilliant, and direct from the seat of
fashion; it was she that first "built up" Wilhelmina's hair on
just principles, and put some life into her appearance.
[Wilhelmina, i. 117.] And now the Fieldmarshal (Tobacco-Parliament
suggesting it) hints farther, "If his Prussian Majesty, in the
mere greatness of his mind, were to appear suddenly in Dresden
when his royal Friend was next there,--what a sunburst after
clouds were that; how welcome to the Polish Majesty!"--"Hm, Na,
would it, then?"--The Polish Majesty puts that out of question;
specially sends invitation for the Carnival-time just coming;
and Friedrich Wilhelm will, accordingly, see Dresden and him on
that occasion. [Ib. i. 108, 109; Pollnitz, ii. 254; Fassman,
p. 374.] In those days, Carnival means "Fashionable Season," rural
nobility rallying to head-quarters for a while, and social
gayeties going on; and in Protestant Countries it means
nothing more.

This, in substance, was the real origin of Friedrich Wilhelm's
sudden visit to Dresden, which astonished the world, in January
next. It makes a great figure in the old Books. It did kindle
Dresden Carnival and the Physically Strong into supreme
illumination, for the time being; and proved the seal of good
agreement, and even of a kind of friendliness between this
heteroclite pair of Sovereigns,--if anybody now cared for those
points. It is with our Crown-Prince's share in it that we are
alone concerned; and that may require a Chapter to itself.



Chapter III.

VISIT TO DRESDEN.

One of the most important adventures, for our young Crown-Prince,
was this visit of his, along with Papa, to Dresden in the Carnival
of 1728. Visit contrived by Seckendorf and Company, as we have
seen, to divert the King's melancholy, and without view to the
Crown-Prince at all. The Crown-Prince, now sixteen, and not in the
best favor with his Father, had not been intended to accompany;
was to stay at Potsdam and diligently drill: nevertheless an
estafette came for him from the gallant Polish Majesty;--
Wilhelmina had spoken a word to good Suhm, who wrote to his King,
and the hospitable message came. Friedrich made no loitering,--to
Dresden is but a hundred miles, one good day;--he arrived there on
the morrow after his Father; King "on the 14th January, 1728,"
dates Fassmann; "Crown-Prince on the 15th," which I find was
Thursday. The Crown-Prince lodged with Fieldmarshal Flemming;
Friedrich Wilhelm, having come in no state, refused King August's
pressings, and took up his quarters with "the General Fieldmarshal
Wackerbarth, Commandant in Dresden,"--pleasant old military
gentleman, who had besieged Stralsund along with him in times
gone. Except Grumkow, Derschau and one or two of less importance,
with the due minimum of Valetry, he had brought no retinue;
the Crown-Prince had Finkenstein and Kalkstein with him, Tutor
and Sub-Tutor, officially there. And he lodges with old Count
Flemming and his clever fashionable Madam,--the diligent but
unsuccessful Flemming, a courtier of the highest civility, though
iracund, and "with a passion for making Treaties," whom we know
since Charles XII.'s time.

Amongst the round of splendors now set on foot, Friedrich Wilhelm
had, by accident of Nature, the spectacle of a house on fire,--
rather a symbolic one in those parts,--afforded him, almost to
start with. Deep in the first Saturday night, or rather about two
in the morning of Sunday, Wackerbarth's grand house, kindling by
negligence somewhere in the garrets, blazed up, irrepressible;
and, with its endless upholsteries, with a fine library even, went
all into flame: so that his Majesty, scarcely saving his CHATOULLE
(box of preciosities), had to hurry out in undress;--over to
Flemming's where his Son was; where they both continued
thenceforth. This was the one touch of rough, amid so much of
dulcet that occurred: no evil, this touch, almost rather
otherwise, except to poor Wackerbarth, whose fine House lay
wrecked by it.

The visit lasted till February 12th, four weeks and a day.
Never was such thrice-magnificent Carnival amusements:
illuminations, cannon-salvoings and fire-works; operas, comedies,
redoubts, sow-baitings, fox and badger-baiting, reviewing, running
at the ring:--dinners of never-imagined quality, this, as a daily
item, needs no express mention.

To the young Soldier-Apprentice all this was, of course, in
pleasant contrast with the Potsdam Guard-house; and Friedrich
Wilhelm himself is understood to have liked at least the dinners,
and the airy courteous ways, light table-wit and extreme good
humor of the host. A successful visit; burns off like successful
fire-works, piece after piece: and what more is to be said? Of all
this nothing;--nor, if we could help it, of another little
circumstance, not mentioned by the Newspapers or Fassmann, which
constitutes the meaning of this Visit for us now. It is a matter
difficult to handle in speech. An English Editor, chary of such
topics, will let two witnesses speak, credible both, though not
eye-witnesses; and leave it to the reader so. Babbling Pollnitz is
the first witness; he deposes, after alluding to the sumptuous
dinings and drinkings there:--

"One day the two Kings, after dinner, went in domino to the
redoubt [RIDOTTO, what we now call ROUT or evening party].
August had a mind to take an opportunity, and try whether the
reports of Friedrich Wilhelm's indifference to the fair sex were
correct or not. To this end, he had had a young damsel (JUNGE
PERSON) of extraordinary beauty introduced into some side-room;
where they now entered. She was lying on a bed, in a loose gauzy
undress; and though masked, showed so many charms to the eye that
the imagination could not but judge very favorably of the rest.
The King of Poland approached, in that gallant way of his, which
had gained him such favor with women. He begged her to unmask;
she at first affected reluctance, and would not. He then told her
who he was; and said, He hoped she would not refuse, when two
Kings begged her to show them this complaisance. She thereupon
took off her mask, and showed them one of the loveliest faces in
the world. August seemed quite enchanted; and said, as if it had
been the first time he ever saw her, He could not comprehend how
so bewitching a beauty had hitherto remained unknown to him.

"Friedrich Wilhelm could not help looking at her. He said to the
King of Poland, 'She is very beautiful, it must be owned;'--but at
the same instant turned his eyes away from her; and left the room,
and the ridotto altogether without delay; went home, and shut
himself in his room. He then sent for Herr von Grumkow, and
bitterly complained that the King of Poland wanted to tempt him.
Herr von Grumkow, who was neither so chaste nor so conscientious
as the King, was for making a jest of the matter; but the King
took a very serious tone; and commanded him to tell the King of
Poland in his name, 'That he begged him very much not to expose
him again to accidents of that nature, unless he wished to have
him quit Dresden at once.' Herr von Grumkow did his message.
The King of Poland laughed heartily at it; went straight to
Friedrich Wilhelm, and excused himself. The King of Prussia,
however, kept his grim look; so that August ceased joking, and
turned the dialogue on some other subject." [Pollnitz, ii. 256.]

This is Pollnitz's testimony, gathered from the whispers of the
Tabagie, or rumors in the Court-circles, and may be taken as
indisputable in the main. Wilhelmina, deriving from similar
sources, and equally uncertain in details, paints more
artistically; nor has she forgotten the sequel for her Brother,
which at present is the essential circumstance:--

"One evening, when the rites of Bacchus had been well attended to,
the King of Poland led the King [my Father], strolling about, by
degrees, into a room very richly ornamented, all the furniture and
arrangements of which were in a quite exquisite taste. The King,
charmed with what he saw, paused to contemplate the beauties of it
a little; when, all on a sudden, a curtain rose, and displayed to
him one of the most extraordinary sights. It was a girl in the
condition of our First Parents, carelessly lying on a bed.
This creature was more beautiful than they paint Venus and the
Graces; she presented to view a form of ivory whiter than snow,
and more gracefully shaped than the Venus de' Medici at Florence.
The cabinet which contained this treasure was lighted by so many
wax-candles that their brilliancy dazzled you, and gave a new
splendor to the beauties of the goddess.

"The Authors of this fine comedy did not doubt but the object
would make an impression on the King's heart; but it was quite
otherwise. No sooner had he cast his eyes on the beauty than he
whirled round with indignation; and seeing my Brother behind him,
he pushed him roughly out of the room, and immediately quitted it
himself; very angry at the scene they had been giving him, He
spoke of it, that same evening, to Grumkow, in very strong terms;
and declared with emphasis that if the like frolics were tried on
him again, he would at once quit Dresden.

"With my Brother it was otherwise. In spite of the King's care, he
had got a full view of that Cabinet Venus; and the sight of her
did not inspire in him so much horror as in his father."
[Wilhelmina, i. 112.]--Very likely not!--And in fact, "he obtained
her from the King of Poland, in a rather singular way
<italic>(d'une facon assez singuliere)" <end italic>--describable,
in condensed terms, as follows:--

Wilhelmina says, her poor Brother had been already charmed over
head and ears by a gay young baggage of a Countess Orzelska;
a very high and airy Countess there; whose history is not to be
touched, except upon compulsion, and as if with a pair of tongs,--
thrice famous as she once was in this Saxon Court of Beelzebub.
She was King August's natural daughter; a French milliner in
Warsaw had produced her for him there. In due time, a male of the
three hundred and fifty-four, one Rutowski, soldier by profession,
whom we shall again hear of, took her for mistress; regardless of
natural half-sisterhood, which perhaps he did not know of.
The admiring Rutowski, being of a participative turn, introduced
her, after a while, to his honored parent and hers; by whom next--
Heavens, human language is unequal to the history of such things!
And it is in this capacity she now shines supreme in the Saxon
Court; ogling poor young Fritz, and driving him distracted;--which
phenomenon the Beelzebub Parent-Lover noticed with pain and
jealousy, it would appear.

"His Polish Majesty distinguished her extremely," says Pollnitz,
[<italic> Memoires, <end italic> ii.261.] "and was continually
visiting her; so that the universal inference was"--to the above
unspeakable effect. "She was of fine figure; had something grand
in her air and carriage, and the prettiest humor in the world.
She often appeared in men's clothes, which became her very well.
People said she was extremely open-handed;" as indeed the
Beelzebub Parent-Lover was of the like quality (when he had cash
about him), and to her, at this time, he was profuse beyond limit.
Truly a tempting aspect of the Devil, this expensive Orzelska:
something beautiful in her, if there are no Laws in this Universe;
not so beautiful, if there are! Enough to turn the head of a poor
Crown-Prince, if she like, for some time. He is just sixteen gone;
one of the prettiest lads and sprightliest; his homage, clearly
enough, is not disagreeable to the baggage. Wherefore jealous
August, the Beelzebub-Parent, takes his measures; signifies to
Fritz, in direct terms, or by discreet diplomatic hints and
innuendoes, That he can have the Cabinet Venus (Formera her name,
of Opera-singer kind);--hoping thereby that the Orzelska will be
left alone in time coming. A <italic> "facon assez singuliere"
<end italic> for a Sovereign Majesty and Beelzebub Parent-Lover,
thinks Wilhelmina.

Thus has our poor Fritz fallen into the wake of Beelzebub; and is
not in a good way. Under such and no better guidance, in this
illicit premature manner, he gets his introduction to the paradise
of the world. The Formera, beautiful as painted Chaos; yes, her;--
and why not, after a while, the Orzelska too, all the same?
A wonderful Armida-Garden, sure enough. And cannot one adore the
painted divine beauties there (lovely as certain apples of the
Dead Sea), for some time?--The miseries all this brought into his
existence,--into his relations with a Father very rigorous in
principle, and with a Universe still more so,--for years to come,
were neither few nor small. And that is the main outcome of the
Dresden visitings for him and us.--

Great pledges pass between the two Kings; Prussian Crown-Prince
decorated with the Order of the Saxon Eagle, or what supreme
distinction they had: Rutowski taken over to Berlin to learn war
and drill, where he did not remain long: in fact a certain liking
seems to have risen between the two heteroclite individualities,
which is perhaps worth remembering as a point in natural history,
if not otherwise. One other small result of the visit is of
pictorial nature. In the famed Dresden Gallery there is still a
Picture, high up, visible if you have glasses, where the Saxon
Court-Painter, on Friedrich Wilhelm's bidding it is said, soon
after these auspicious occurrences, represents the two Majesties
as large as life, in their respective costumes and features (short
Potsdam Grenadier-Colonel and tall Saxon Darius or Sardanapalus),
in the act of shaking hands; symbolically burying past grudges,
and swearing eternal friendship, so to speak. [Forster, i. 226.]
To this Editor the Picture did not seem good for much;
but Friedrich Wilhelm's Portrait in it, none of the best, may be
of use to travelling friends of his who have no other.

The visit ended on the 12th of February, as the Newspapers
testify. Long before daybreak, at three in the morning, Friedrich
Wilhelm, "who had smoked after dinner till nine the night before,"
and taken leave of everybody, was on the road; but was astonished
to find King August and the Electoral Prince or Heir-Apparent (who
had privately sat up for the purpose) insist on conducting him to
his carriage. [Boyer, xxxv. l98.] "Great tokens of affection,"
known to the Newspapers, there were; and one token not yet known,
a promise on King August's part that he would return this
ever-memorable compliment in person at Potsdam and Berlin in a few
months. Remember, then!--

As for the poor Crown-Prince, whom already his Father did not
like, he now fell into circumstances more abstruse than ever in
that and other respects. Bad health, a dangerous lingering fit of
that, soon after his return home, was one of the first
consequences. Frequent fits of bad health, for some years coming;
with ominous rumors, consultations of physicians, and reports to
the paternal Majesty, which produced small comfort in that
quarter. The sad truth, dimly indicated, is sufficiently visible:
his life for the next four or five years was "extremely
dissolute." Poor young man, he has got into a disastrous course;
consorts chiefly with debauched young fellows, as Lieutenants
Katte, Keith, and others of their stamp, who lead him on ways not
pleasant to his Father, nor conformable to the Laws of this
Universe. Health, either of body or of mind, is not to be looked
for in his present way of life. The bright young soul, with its
fine strengths and gifts; wallowing like a young rhinoceros in the
mud-bath:--some say, it is wholesome for a human soul; not we!

All this is too certain; rising to its height in the years we are
now got to, and not ending for four or five years to come: and the
reader can conceive all this, and whether its effects were good or
not. Friedrich Wilhelm's old-standing disfavor is converted into
open aversion and protest, many times into fits of sorrow, rage
and despair, on his luckless Son's behalf;--and it appears
doubtful whether this bright young human soul, comparable for the
present to a rhinoceros wallowing in the mud-bath, with nothing
but its snout visible, and a dirty gurgle all the sound it makes,
will ever get out again or not.

The rhinoceros soul got out; but not uninjured; alas, no;
bitterly polluted, tragically dimmed of its finest radiances for
the remainder of life. The distinguished Sauerteig, in his
SPRINGWURZELN, has these words: "To burn away, in mad waste, the
divine aromas and plainly celestial elements from our existence;
to change our holy-of-holies into a place of riot; to make the
soul itself hard, impious, barren! Surely a day is coming, when it
will be known again what virtue is in purity and continence of
life; how divine is the blush of young human cheeks; how high,
beneficent, sternly inexorable if forgotten, is the duty laid, not
on women only, but on every creature, in regard to these
particulars? Well; if such a day never come again, then I perceive
much else will never come. Magnanimity and depth of insight will
never come; heroic purity of heart and of eye; noble pious valor,
to amend us and the age of bronze and lacquer, how can they ever
come? The scandalous bronze-lacquer age, of hungry animalisms,
spiritual impotencies and mendacities, will have to run its
course, till the Pit swallow it."--

In the case of Friedrich, it is certain such a day never fully
came. The "age of bronze and lacquer," so as it then stood,--
relieved truly by a backbone of real Spartan IRON (of right battle
STEEL when needed): this was all the world he ever got to dream
of. His ideal, compared to that of some, was but low;
his existence a hard and barren, though a genuine one, and only
worth much memory in the absence of better. Enough of all that.


THE PHYSICALLY STRONG PAYS HIS COUNTER-VISIT.

August the Strong paid his Return-visit in May following. Of which
sublime transaction, stupendous as it then was to the Journalistic
mind, we should now make no mention, except for its connection
with those points,--and more especially for a foolish rumor, which
now rose about Prince Fred and the Double-Marriage, on occasion of
it. The magnificence of this visit and reception being so
extreme,--King August, for one item, sailing to it, with sound of
trumpet and hautbois, in silken flotillas gayer than Cleopatra's,
down the Elbe,--there was a rush towards Berlin of what we will
not call the scum, but must call the foam of mankind, rush of the
idle moneyed populations from all countries; and such a crowd
there, for the three weeks, as was seldom seen. Foam everywhere is
stirred up, and encouraged to get under way.

Prince Frederick of Hanover and England, "Duke of Edinburgh" as
they now call him, "Duke of Gloucester" no longer, it would seem,
nor "Prince of Wales" as yet; he, foamy as another, had thoughts
of coming; and rumor of him rose very high in Berlin,--how high we
have still singular proof. Here is a myth, generated in the busy
Court-Imagination of Berlin at this time; written down by Pollnitz
as plain fact afterwards; and from him idly copied into COXE
[Coxe's <italic> Walpole <end italic> (London, 1798), i. 520.] and
other English Books. We abridge from watery Pollnitz, taking care
of any sense he has. This is what ran in certain high-frizzled
heads then and there: and was dealt out in whispers to a
privileged few, watery Pollnitz's informers among them, till they
got a myth made of it. Frederick Duke of Edinburgh, second hope of
England at this time, he is the hero.

It appears, this loose young gentleman, standing in no favor with
his sovereign Father, had never yet been across to England, the
royal Parent preferring rather not to have him in sight; and was
living idle at Hanover; very eager to be wedded to Wilhelmina, as
one grand and at present grandest resource of his existence. It is
now May, 1728; and Frederick Duke of Edinburgh is twenty-one.
He writes to his Aunt and intended Mother-in-law, Queen Sophie
(date not ascertainable to a day, Note burnt as soon as read):
"That he can endure this tantalizing suspense no longer;
such endless higgling about a supreme blessedness, virtually
agreed upon, may be sport to others, but is death to him. That he
will come privately at once, and wed his Wilhelmina; and so make
an end; the big-wigs to adjust it afterwards as they can and may."
Whereupon Sophie Dorothee, gladdest of women, sends for Dubourgay
the British Ambassador (Brigadier Dubourgay, the respectable old
gentleman who spells ill, who is strong for the Double-Marriage
always), to tell him what fine news there is, and what answer she
has sent. Respectable Dubourgay stands silent, with lengthening
face: "Your Majesty, how unfortunate that I of all men now hear
it! I must instantly despatch a courier with the news to London!"
And the respectable man, stoically deaf to her Majesty's
entreaties, to all considerations but that of his evident duty,
"sends the courier" (thinks Pollnitz);--nips thereby that fine
Hanover speculation in the bud, sees Prince Fred at once summoned
over to England, and produces several effects. Nearly the whole of
which, on examining the Documents, [Dubourgay's Despatches (1728:
29 May, 1 June, 5 October), in the State-Paper Office here.]
proves to be myth.

Pollnitz himself adds two circumstances, in regard to it, which
are pretty impossible: as, first, that Friedrich Wilhelm had
joyfully consented to this clandestine marriage, and was eagerly
waiting for it; second, that George II. too had privately favored
or even instigated the adventure, being at heart willing to escape
the trouble of Messages to Parliament, to put his Son in the
wrong, and I know not what. [Pollnitz, ii. 272-274.] The particles
of fact in the affair are likewise two: First, that Queen Sophie,
and from her the Courtier Public generally, expected the Hanover
Royal Highness, who probably had real thoughts of seeing Berlin
and his Intended, on this occasion; Dubourgay reports daily rumors
of the Royal Highness being actually "seen" there in an evanescent
manner; and Wilhelmina says, her Mother was so certain of him,
"she took every ass or mule for the Royal Highness,"--heartily
indifferent to Wilhelmina. This is the first particle of fact.
The Second is, that a subaltern Official about the Royal Highness,
one Lamothe of Hanover, who had appeared in Berlin about that
time, was thrown into prison not long after, for what misbehavior
none knew,--for encouraging dissolute Royal Highness in wild
schemes, it was guessed. And so the Myth grew, and was found ready
for Pollnitz and his followers. Royal Highness did come over to
England; not then as the Myth bears, but nine months afterwards in
December next; and found other means of irritating his imperative,
flighty, irascible and rather foolish little Father, in an
ever-increasing degree. "Very coldly received at Court," it is
said: ill seen by Walpole and the Powers; being too likely to
become a focus of Opposition there.

The Visit, meanwhile, though there came no Duke of Edinburgh to
see it, was sublime in the extreme; Polish Majesty being
magnificence itself; and the frugal Friedrich Wilhelm lighting up
his dim Court into insurpassable brilliancy, regardless of
expense; so that even the Smoking Parliament (where August
attended now and then) became luminous. The Crown-Prince, who in
late months had languished in a state of miserable health, in a
manner ominous to his physicians, confined mostly to his room or
his bed, was now happily on foot again;--and Wilhelmina notes one
circumstance which much contributed to his recovery: That the fair
Orzelska had attended her natural (or unnatural) Parent, on this
occasion; and seemed to be, as Wilhelmina thinks, uncommonly kind
to the Crown-Prince. The Heir-Apparent of Saxony, a taciturn,
inoffensive, rather opaque-looking gentleman, now turned of
thirty, and gone over to Papistry long since, with views to be
King of Poland by and by, which proved effectual as we shall find,
was also here: Count Bruhl, too, still in a very subaltern
capacity, and others whom we and the Crown-Prince shall have to
know. The Heir-Apparent's Wife (actual Kaiser's Niece, late Kaiser
Joseph's Daughter, a severe Austrian lady, haughtier than lovely)
has stayed at home in Dresden.

But here, at first hand, is a slight view of that unique Polish
Majesty, the Saxon Man of Sin; which the reader may be pleased to
accept out of idle curiosity, if for no better reason. We abridge
from Wilhelmina; [i. 124.] whom Fassmann, kindled to triple
accuracy by this grand business, is at hand to correct where
needful: [<italic> Des glorwurdigsten Fursten und Herrn, Herrn
Friedrich Augusti des Grossen Leben und Helden-Thaten <end italic>
(Of that most glorious Prince and Lord, Lord Friedrich August the
Great, King of Poland, &c., the Life and Heroic Deeds), by D. F.
(David Fassmann), Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1734; 12mo, pp. 1040.
A work written with upturned eyes of prostrate admiration for
"DERO MAJESTAT" ('Theiro' Majesty) AUGUST THE GREAT;" exact too,
but dealing merely with the CLOTHES of the matter, and such a
matter: work unreadable, except on compulsion, to the stupidest
mortal. The same Fassmann, who was at the Fair of St. Germain, who
lodged sometimes with the Potsdam Giant, and whose ways are all
fallen dark to us.] "The King of Poland arrived upon us at Berlin
on the 29th of May," says Wilhelmina; had been at Potsdam, under
Friedrich Wilhelm's care, for three days past: Saturday afternoon,
29th May, 1728; that is with exactitude the ever-memorable date.

He paid his respects in her Majesty's apartment, for an instant,
that evening; but made his formal visit next day. Very grand
indeed. Carried by two shining parti-colored creatures, heyducs
so-called, through double rows of mere peerages and sublimities,
in a sublime sedan (being lame of a foot, foot lately amputated of
two toes, sore still open): "in a sedan covered with red velvet
gallooned with gold," says the devout Fassmann, tremblingly exact,
"up the grand staircase along the grand Gallery;" in which supreme
region (Apartments of the late King Friedrich of gorgeous memory)
her Majesty now is for the occasion. "The Queen received him at
the door of her third Antechamber," says Wilhelmina; third or
outmost Antechamber, end of that grand Gallery and its peerages
and shining creatures: "he gave the Queen his hand, and led her
in." We Princesses were there, at least the grown ones of us were.
All standing, except the Queen only. "He refused to sit, and again
refused;" stoically talked graciosities, disregarding the pain of
his foot; and did not, till refusal threatened to become uncivil,
comply with her Majesty's entreaties. "How unpolite!" smiled he to
us young ones. "He had a majestic port and physiognomy; an affable
polite air accompanied all his movements, all his actions."
Kind of stereotyped smile on his face; nothing of the inner gloom
visible on our Charles II. and similar men of sin. He looked often
at Wilhelmina, and was complimentary to a degree,--for reasons
undivinable to Wilhelmina. For the rest, "much broken for his
age;" the terrible debaucheries (LES DEBAUCHES TERRIBLES) having
had their effect on him. He has fallen Widower last year. His poor
Wife was a Brandenburg-Baireuth Princess; a devout kind of woman;
austerely witnessing the irremediable in her lot. He has got far
on with his three hundred and fifty-four; is now going
fifty-five;--lame of a foot, as we see, which the great Petit of
Paris cannot cure, neither he nor any Surgeon, but can only
alleviate by cutting off two toes. Pink of politeness, no doubt of
it; but otherwise the strangest dilapidated hulk of a two-legged
animal without feathers; probably, in fact, the chief Natural
Solecism under the Sun at that epoch;--extremely complimentary to
us Princesses, to me especially. "He quitted her Majesty's
Apartment after an hour's conversation: she rose to reconduct him,
but he would by no manner of means permit that,"--and so vanished,
carried off doubtless by the shining creatures again.
The "Electoral Prince" Heir-Apparent, next made his visit;
but he was a dry subject in comparison, of whom no Princess can
say much. Prince Friedrich will know him better by and by.

Young Maurice, "Count of Saxony," famed afterwards as MARECHAL DE
SAXE, he also is here with his Half-Sister Orzelska and the
others, in the train of the paternal Man of Sin; and makes
acquaintance with Friedrich. He is son of the female Konigsmark
called Aurora ("who alone of mortals could make Charles Twelfth
fly his ground"); nephew, therefore, of the male Konigsmark who
was cut down long ago at Hanover, and buried in the fireplace.
He resembles his Father in strength, vivacity, above all things in
debauchery, and disregard of finance. They married him at the due
years to some poor rich woman; but with her he has already ended;
with her and with many others. Courland, Adrienne Lecouvreur, Anne
Iwanowna with the big cheek:--the reader has perhaps searched out
these things for himself from the dull History-Books;--or perhaps
it was better for him if he never sought them? Dukedom of
Courland, connected with Polish sovereignty, and now about to fall
vacant, was one of Count Maurice's grand sallies in the world.
Adrienne Lecouvreur, foolish French Actress, lent him all the
30,000 pounds she had gathered by holding the mirror up to Nature
and otherwise, to prosecute this Courland business; which proved
impossible for him. He was adventurous enough, audacious enough;
fought well; but the problem was, To fall in love with the Dowager
Anne Iwanowna, Cousin of Czar Peter II.; big brazen Russian woman
(such a cheek the Pictures give her, in size and somewhat in
expression like a Westphalia ham!), who was Widow of the last
active Duke:--and this, with all his adventurous audacity, Count
Maurice could not do. The big Widow discovered that he did not
like Westphalia hams in that particular form; that he only
pretended to like them; upon which, in just indignation, she
disowned and dismissed him; and falling herself to be Czarina not
long afterwards, and taking Bieren the Courlander for her beloved,
she made Bieren Duke, and Courland became impossible for
Count Maurice.

However, he too is a dashing young fellow; "circular black
eyebrows, eyes glittering bright, partly with animal vivacity,
partly with spiritual;" stands six feet in his stockings, breaks
horse-shoes with his hands; full of irregular ingenuity and
audacity; has been soldiering about, ever since birth almost;
and understands many a thing, though the worst SPELLER ever known.
With him too young Fritz is much charmed: the flower, he, of the
illegitimate three hundred and fifty-four, and probably the chief
achievement of the Saxon Man of Sin in this world, where he took
such trouble. Friedrich and he maintained some occasional
correspondence afterwards; but, to judge by Friedrich's part of it
(mere polite congratulations on Fontenoy, and the like), it must
have been of the last vacuity; and to us it is now absolute zero,
however clearly spelt and printed. [Given altogether in <italic>
OEuvres de Frederic le Grand, <end italic> xvii. 300-309.
See farther, whoever has curiosity, Preuss, <italic> Friedrichs
Lebensgeschichte, <end italic> iii. 167-169; Espagnac, <italic>
Vie du Comte de Saxe <end italic> (a good little military Book,
done into German, Leipzig, 1774, 2 vols.); Cramer, <italic>
Denkwurdigkeiten der Grafin Aurora von Konigsmark <end italic>
(Leipzig, 1836); &c. &c.]

The Physically Strong, in some three weeks, after kindling such an
effulgence about Berlin as was never seen before or since in
Friedrich Wilhelm's reign, went his way again,--"towards Poland
for the Diet," or none of us cares whither or for what. Here at
Berlin he has been sublime enough. Some of the phenomena surpassed
anything Wilhelmina ever saw: such floods and rows of resplendent
people crowding in to dinner; and she could not but contrast the
splendor of the Polish retinues and their plumages and draperies,
with the strait-buttoned Prussian dignitaries, all in mere soldier
uniform, succinct "blue coat, white linen gaiters," and no
superfluity even in the epaulettes and red facings. At table, she
says, they drank much, talked little, and bored one another a
great deal (S'ENNUYOIENT BEAUCOUP).


OF PRINCESS WHILHELMINA'S FOUR KINGS AND OTHER INEFFECTUALSUITORS.

Dilapidated Polish Majesty, we observed, was extremely attentive
to Wilhelmina; nor could she ascertain, for long after, what the
particular reason was. Long after, Wilhelmina ascertained that
there had been the wonderfulest scheme concocting, or as good as
concocted, in these swearings of eternal friendship: no other than
that of marrying her, Wilhelmina, now a slim maiden coming
nineteen, to this dilapidated Saxon Man of Sin going (or limping)
fifty-five, and broken by DEBAUCHES TERRIBLES (rivers of champagne
and tokay, for one item), who had fallen a Widower last year!
They had schemed it all out, Wilhelmina understands: Friedrich
Wilhelm to advance such and such moneys as dowry, and others
furthermore as loan, for the occasions of his Polish Majesty,
which are manifold; Wilhelmina to have The Lausitz (LUSATIA) for
jointure, Lausitz to be Friedrich Wilhelm's pledge withal;
and other intricate conditions; [Wilhelmina, i. 114.] what would
Wilhelmina have thought? One shudders to contemplate;--hopes it
might mostly be loose brain-web and courtier speculation, never
settled towards fact.

It is certain, the dilapidated Polish Majesty having become a
Widower, questions would rise, Will not he marry again? And with
whom? Certain also, he wants Friedrich Wilhelm's alliance;
having great schemes on the anvil, which are like to be delicate
and perilous,--schemes of "partitioning Poland," no less; that is
to say, cutting off the outskirts of Poland, flinging them to
neighboring Sovereigns as propitiation, or price of good-will, and
rendering the rest hereditary in his family. Pragmatic Sanction
once acceded to, would probably  propitiate the Kaiser? For which,
and other reasons, Polish Majesty still keeps that card in his
hand. Friedrich Wilhelm's alliance, with such an army and such a
treasury, the uses of that are evident to the Polish Majesty.--
By the blessing of Heaven, however, his marriage with Wilhelmina
never came to anything: his Electoral Prince, Heir-Apparent,
objected to the jointures and alienations, softly, steadily;
and the project had to drop before Wilhelmina ever knew of it.

And this man is probably one of the "Four Kings" she was to be
asked by? A Swedish Officer, with some skill in palmistry, many
years ago, looked into her innocent little hand, and prophesied,
"She was to be in terms of courtship, engagement or as good as
engagement, with Four Kings, and to wed none of them." Wilhelmina
counts them in her mature days. The FIRST will surprise
everybody,--Charles XII. of Sweden;--who never can have been much
of a suitor, the rather as the young Lady was then only six gone;
but who, might, like enough, be talked of, by transient
third-parties, in those old Stralsund times. The SECOND,--cannot
WE guess who the second is? The THIRD is this August the
dilapidated Strong. As to the SECOND, Wilhelmina sees already,
in credulous moments, that it may be Hanover Fred, whom she will
never marry either;--and does not see (nor did, at the time of
writing her <italic> Memoires, <end italic> "in 1744" say the
Books) that Fred never would come to Kingship, and that the
Palmistry was incomplete in that point. The FOURTH, again, is
clearly young Czar Peter II.; of whom there was transient talk or
project, some short time after this of the dilapidated THIRD.
But that too came to nothing; the poor young lad died while only
fifteen; nay he had already "fallen in love with his Aunt
Elizabeth" (INFAME CATIN DU NORD in time coming), and given up the
Prussian prospect. [He was the Great Peter's Grandson (Son having
gone a tragical road ); Czar, May, 1727--January, 1730:
Anne Iwanowna (Great Peter's Niece, elder Brother's Daughter), our
Courland friend with the big cheek, succeeded; till her death,
October, 1740: then, after some slight shock of revolution, the
Elizabeth just mentioned, who was Daughter of the Great Peter by
his little brown Czarina Catherine whom we once met.
See Mannstein, <italic> Memoirs of Russia <end italic> (London,
1770), pp. 1-23, for some account of Peter II.; and the rest of
the Volume for a really intelligent History of this Anne, at least
of her Wars, where Mannstein himself usually had part.

All which would be nothing, or almost less, to Wilhelmina, walking
fancy-free there,--were it not for Papa and Mamma, and the
importunate insidious by-standers. Who do make a thing of it,
first and last! Never in any romance or stage-play was young Lady,
without blame, without furtherance and without hindrance of her
own, so tormented about a settlement in life;--passive she, all
the while, mere clay in the hands of the potter; and begging the
Universe to have the extreme goodness only to leave her alone!--

Thus too, among the train of King August in this Berlin visit, a
certain Soldier Official of his, Duke of Sachsen Weissenfels,
Johann Adolf by name, a poor Cadet Cousin of the Saxon House,--
another elderly Royal Highness of small possibility,--was
particularly attentive to Wilhelmina; now and on subsequent
occasions. Titular Duke of Weissenfels, Brother of the real Duke,
and not even sure of the succession as yet; but living on King
August's pay; not without capacity of drink and the like, some
allege:--otherwise a mere betitled, betasselled elderly military
gentleman, of no special qualities, evil or good;--who will often
turn up again in this History; but fails always to make any
impression on us except that of a Serene Highness in the abstract;
unexceptionable Human Mask, of polite turn, behung with titles,
and no doubt a stomach in the inside of it: he now, and
afterwards, by all opportunities, diligently continued his
attentions in the Wilhelmina quarter. For a good while it was
never guessed what he could be driving at; till at last Queen
Sophie, becoming aware of it, took him to task; with cold
severity, reminded him that some things are on one's level, and
some things not. To which humbly bowing, in unfeigned penitence,
he retired from the audacity, back foremost: Would never even in
dreams have presumed, had not his Prussian Majesty authorized;
would now, since HER Prussian Majesty had that feeling, withdraw
silently, and live forgotten, as an obscure Royal Highness in the
abstract (though fallen Widower lately) ought to do. And so at
least there was an end of that matter, one might hope,--though in
effect it still abortively started up now and then, on Papa's
part, in his frantic humors, for years to come.

Then there is the Margraf of Schwedt, Friedrich Wilhelm by name,
chief Prince of the Blood, his Majesty's Cousin, and the Old
Dessauer's Nephew; none of the likeliest of men, intrinsically
taken: he and his Dowager Mother--the Dessauer's Sister, a
high-going, tacitly obstinate old Dowager (who dresses, if I
recollect, in flagrant colors)--are very troublesome to
Wilhelmina. The flagrant Dame--she might have been "Queen-Mother"
once forsooth, had Papa and my Brother but been made away with!--
watches her time, and is diligent by all opportunities.



Chapter IV.

DOUBLE-MARRIAGE PROJECT IS NOT DEAD.

And the Double-Marriage, in such circumstances, are we to consider
it as dead, then? In the soul of Queen Sophie and those she can
influence, it lives flame-bright; but with all others it has
fallen into a very dim state. Friedrich Wilhelm is still privately
willing, perhaps in a degree wishful; but the delays, the
supercilious neglects have much disgusted him; and he, in the mean
while, entertains those new speculations. George II., never a
lover of the Prussian Majesty's nor loved by him, has been very
high and distant ever since his Accession; offensive rather than
otherwise. He also is understood to be vaguely willing for the
thing; willing enough, would it be so kind as accomplish itself
without trouble to him. But the settlements, the applications to
Parliament:--and all for this perverse Fred, who has become
unlovely, and irritates our royal mind? George pushes the matter
into its pigeon-holes again, when brought before him.
Higher thoughts occupy the soul of little George. Congress of
Soissons, Convention of the Pardo, [Or, in effect, "Treaty of
Madrid," 6th March, 1728. This was the PREFACE to Soissons;
Termagant at length consenting there, "at her Palace of the Pardo"
(Kaiser and all the world urging her for ten months past), to
accept the Peace, and leave off besieging Gibraltar to no purpose
(Coxe, i. 303).] Treaty of Seville; a part to be acted on the
world-theatre, with applauses, with envies, almost from the very
demi-gods? Great Kaisers, overshadowing Nature with their
Pragmatic Sanctions, their preternatural Diplomacies, and making
the Terrestrial Balance reel hither and thither;--Kaisers to be
clenched perhaps by one's dexterity of grasp, and the Balance
steadied again? Prussian Double-Marriage!

One royal soul there is who never will consent to have the
Double-Marriage die: Queen Sophie. She had passed her own private
act-of-parliament for it; she was a very obstinate wife, to a
husband equally obstinate. "JE BOULEVERSERAI L'EMPIRE," writes she
once; "I will overturn the German Empire," if they drive me to it,
in this matter. [Letter copied by Dubourgay (in Despatch, marked
PRIVATE, to Lord Townshend, 3d-14th May, 1729); no clear address
given,--probably to Dubourgay himself, CONVEYED by "a Lady" (one
of the Queen's Ladies), as he dimly intimates.] What secret
manoeuvring and endeavoring went on unweariedly on royal Sophie's
part, we need not say; nor in what bad element, of darkness and
mendacity, of eavesdropping, rumoring, backstairs intriguing, the
affair now moved. She corresponds on it with Queen Caroline of
England; she keeps her two children true to it, especially her
Son, the more important of them.


CROWN-PRINCE FRIEDRICH WRITES CERTAIN LETTERS.

Queen Sophie did not overturn the Empire, but she did almost
overturn her own and her family's existence, by these courses;
which were not wise in her case. It is certain she persuaded
Crown-Prince Friedrich, who was always his Mother's boy, and who
perhaps needed little bidding in this instance, "to write to Queen
Caroline of England;" Letters one or several: thrice-dangerous
Letters; setting forth (in substance), His deathless affection to
that Beauty of the world, her Majesty's divine Daughter the
Princess Amelia (a very paragon of young women, to judge by her
picture and one's own imagination); and likewise the firm
resolution he, Friedrich Crown-Prince, has formed, and the vow he
hereby makes, Either to wed that celestial creature when
permitted, or else never any of the Daughters of Eve in this
world. Congresses of Soissons, Smoking Parliaments, Preliminaries
of the Pardo and Treaties of Seville may go how they can. If well,
it shall be well: if not well, here is my vow, solemn promise and
unchangeable determination, which your gracious Majesty is humbly
entreated to lay up in the tablets of your royal heart, and to
remember on my behalf, should bad days arise!--

It is clear such Letters were sent; at what date first beginning,
we do not know;--possibly before this date? Nor would matters rise
to the vowing pitch all at once. One Letter, supremely dangerous
should it come to be known, Wilhelmina has copied for us,
[Wilhelmina, i. 183.]--in Official style (for it is the Mother's
composition this one) and without date to it:--the guessable date
is about two years hence; and we will give the poor Document
farther on, if there be place for it.

Such particulars are yet deeply unknown to Friedrich Wilhelm;
but he surmises the general drift of things in that quarter;
and how a disobedient Son, crossing his Father's will in every
point, abets his Mother's disobedience, itself audacious enough,
in regard to this one. It is a fearful aggravation of Friedrich
Wilhelm's ill-humor with such a Son, which has long been upon the
growing hand. His dislikes, we know, were otherwise neither few
nor small. Mere "disLIKES" properly so called, or dissimilarities
to Friedrich Wilhelm, a good many of them; dissimilarities also to
a Higher Pattern, some! But these troubles of the Double-Marriage
will now hurry them, the just and the unjust of them, towards the
flaming pitch. The poor youth has a bad time; and the poor Father
too, whose humor we know! Surly gusts of indignation, not
unfrequently cuffs and strokes; or still worse, a settled
aversion, and rage of the chronic kind; studied neglect and
contempt,--so as not even to help him at table, but leave him
fasting while the others eat; [Dubourgay, SCAPIUS.] this the young
man has to bear. The innumerable maltreatments, authentically
chronicled in Wilhelmina's and the other Books, though in a
dateless, unintelligible manner, would make a tragic sum!--
Here are two Billets, copied from the Prussian State-Archives,
which will show us to what height matters had gone, in this the
young man's seventeenth year.

TO HIS MAJESTY (from the Crown-Prince).

"WUSTERHAUSEN, 11th September, 1728.
MY DEAR PAPA,--I have not, for a long while, presumed to come to
my dear Papa; partly because he forbade me; but chiefly because I
had reason to expect a still worse reception than usual: and, for
fear of angering my dear Papa by my present request, I have
preferred making it in writing to him.

I therefore beg my dear Papa to be gracious to me; and can here
say that, after long reflection, my conscience has not accused me
of any the least thing with which I could reproach myself. But if
I have, against my will and knowledge, done anything that has
angered my dear Papa, I herewith most submissively beg
forgiveness; and hope my dear Papa will lay aside that cruel
hatred which I cannot but notice in all his treatment of me.
I could not otherwise suit myself to it; as I always thought I had
a gracious Papa, and now have to see the contrary. I take
confidence, then, and hope that my dear Papa will consider all
this, and again be gracious to me. And, in the mean while, I
assure him that I will never, all my days, fail with my will;
and, notwithstanding his disfavor to me, remain

"My dear Papa's
"Most faithful and obedient Servant and Son,

"FRIEDRICH."


To which Friedrich Wilhelm, by return of messenger, writes what
follows. Very implacable, we may perceive;--not calling his
Petitioner "Thou," as kind Paternity might have dictated;
infinitely less by the polite title "They (SIE)," which latter
indeed, the distinguished title of "SIC," his Prussian Majesty, we
can remark, reserves for Foreigners of the supremest quality, and
domestic Princes of the Blood; naming all other Prussian subjects,
and poor Fritz in this place, "He (ER)," in the style of a
gentleman to his valet,--which style even a valet of these new
days of ours would be unwilling to put up with. "ER, He," "His"
and the other derivatives sound loftily repulsive in the German
ear; and lay open impassable gulfs between the Speaker and the
Spoken-to. "His obstinate"--But we must, after all, say THY and
THOU for intelligibility's sake:--

"Thy obstinate perverse disposition [KOPF, head], which does not
love thy Father,--for when one does everything [everything
commanded] and really loves one's Father, one does what the Father
requires, not while he is there to see it, but when his back is
turned too [His Majesty's style is very abstruse, ill-spelt,
intricate, and in this instance trips itself, and falls on its
face here, a mere intricate nominative without a verb!]--For the
rest, thou know'st very well that I can endure no effeminate
fellow (EFEMINIRTEN KERL), who has no human inclination in him;
who puts himself to shame, cannot ride nor shoot; and withal is
dirty in his person; frizzles his hair like a fool, and does not
cut it off. And all this I have, a  thousand times, reprimanded;
but all in vain, and no improvement in nothing (KEINE BESSERUNG IN
NITS IST). For the rest, haughty, proud as a churl; speaks to
nobody but some few, and is not popular and affable; and cuts
grimaces with his face, as if he were a fool; and does my will in
nothing unless held to it by force; nothing out of love;--and has
pleasure in nothing but following his own whims [own KOPF],--no
use to him in anything else. This is the answer.

"FRIEDRICH WILHELM."

[Preuss, i. 27; from Cramer, pp. 33, 34.]


DOUBLE-MARRIAGE PROJECT RE-EMERGES IN AN OFFICIAL SHAPE.

These are not favorable outlooks for the Double-Marriage.
Nevertheless it comes and goes; and within three weeks later, we
are touched almost with a kind of pity to see it definitely
emerging in a kind of Official state once more. For the question
is symbolical of important political questions. The question means
withal, What is to be done in these dreadful Congress-of-Soissons
complexities, and mad reelings of the Terrestrial Balance?
Shall we hold by a dubious and rather losing Kaiser of this kind,
in spite of his dubieties, his highly inexplicit, procedures (for
which he may have reasons) about the Promise of Julich and Berg?
Or shall we not clutch at England, after all,--and perhaps bring
him to terms? The Smoking Parliament had no Hansard; but, we guess
its Debates (mostly done in dumb-show) were cloudy, abstruse and
abundant, at this time! The Prussian Ministers, if they had any
power, take different sides; old Ilgen, the oldest and ablest of
them, is strong for England.

Enough, in the beginning of October, Queen Sophie, "by express
desire of his Majesty," who will have explicit, Yes or No on that
matter, writes to England, a Letter "PRIVATE AND OFFICIAL," of
such purport,--Letter (now invisible) which Dubourgay is proud to
transmit. [Despatch, 5th October, 1728, in State-Paper Office.]
Dubourgay is proud; and old Ilgen, her Majesty informed me on the
morrow, "wept for joy," so zealous was he on that side. Poor old
gentleman,--respectable rusty old Iron Safe with seven locks,
which nobody would now care to pick,--he died few weeks after, at
his post as was proper; and saw no Double-Marriage, after all.
But Dubourgay shakes out his feathers; the Double-Marriage being
again evidently alive.

For England answers, cordially enough, if not, with all the hurry
Friedrich Wilhelm wanted, "Yea, we are willing for the thing;"--
and meets, with great equanimity and liberality, the new whims,
difficulties and misgivings, which arose on Friedrich Wilhelm's
part, at a wearisome rate, as the negotiation went on; and which
are always frankly smoothed away again by the cooler party.
Why did not the bargain close, then? Alas, one finds, the answer
YEA had unfortunately set his Prussian Majesty on viewing, through
magnifiers, what advantages there might have been in NO: this is a
difficulty there is no clearing away! Probably, too, the
Tobacco-Parliament was industrious. Friedrich Wilhelm, at last,
tries if Half will not do; anxious, as we all too much are, "to
say Yes AND No;" being in great straits, poor man:--"Your Prince
of Wales to wed Wilhelmina at once; the other Match to stand
over?" To which the English Government answers always briefly,
"No; both the Marriages or none!"--Will the reader consent to a
few compressed glances into the extinct Dubourgay Correspondence;
much compressed, and here and there a rushlight stuck in it, for
his behoof. Dubourgay, at Berlin, writes; my Lord Townshend, in
St. James's reads, usually rather languid in answering:--

BERLIN, 9th NOVEMBER, 1728. "Prussian Majesty much pleased with
English Answers" to the Yes-or-No question: "will send a Minister
to our Court about the time his Britannic Majesty may think of
coming over to his German Dominions. Would Finkenstein (Head
Tutor), or would Knyphausen (distinguished Official here), be the
agreeable man?" "Either," answer the English; "either is good."

BERLIN, SAME DATE. "Queen sent for me just now; is highly content
with the state of things. 'I have now,' said her Majesty, 'the
pleasure to tell you that I am free, God be blessed, of all the
anguish I have labored under for some time past, which was so
great that I have several times been on the point of sending for
you to procure my Brother's protection for my Son, who, I thought,
ran the greatest danger from the artifices of Seckendorf and'"--
Poor Queen!

NOV, 16th. "Queen told me: When the Court was at Wusterhausen,"
two months ago, hunting partridges and wild swine, [Fassmann,
p. 386.] "Seckendorf and Grumkow intrigued for a match between
Wilhelmina and the Prince of Weissenfels," elderly Royal Highness
in the Abstract, whom we saw already, "thereby to prevent a closer
union between the Prussian and English Courts,--and Grumkow having
withal the private view of ousting his antagonist the Prince of
Anhalt [Old Dessauer, whom he had to meet in duel, but did not
fight], as Weissenfels, once Son-in-law, would certainly be made
Commander-in-Chief," [Dubourgay, in State-Paper Office (Prussian
Despatches, vol. XXXV.)] to the extrusion of Anhalt from that
office. Which notable piece of policy her Majesty, by a little
plain speech, took her opportunity of putting an end to, as we
saw. For the rest, "the Dutch Minister and also the French
Secretaries here," greatly interested about the peace of Europe,
and the Congress of Soissons in these weeks, "have had a
communication from this Court, of the favorable disposition ours
is in with respect to the Double Match,"--beneficent for the
Terrestrial Balance, as they and I hope. So that things look
well? Alas,--

DECEMBER 25th. "Queen sent for me yesterday: Hopes she does no
wrong in complaining of her Husband to her Brother. King shows
scruples about the Marriages; does not relish the expense of an
establishment for the Prince; hopes, at all events, the Marriage
will not take place for a year yet;--would like to know what Dowry
the English Princess is to bring?"--"No Dowry with our Princess,"
the English answer; "nor shall you give any with yours."

NEW-YEAR'S DAY, 1729. "Queen sent for me: King is getting
intractable about the Marriages; she reasoned with him from two
o'clock till eight," without the least permanent effect. "It is
his covetousness," I Dubourgay privately think!--Knyphausen, who
knows the King well, privately tells me, "He will come round."
"It is his avarice," thinks Knyphausen too; "nay it is also his
jealousy of the Prince, who is very popular with the Army.
King does everything to mortify him, uses him like a child;
Crown-Prince bears it with admirable patience." This is
Knyphausen's weak notion; rather a weak creaky official gentleman,
I should gather, of a cryptosplenetic turn. "Queen told me some
days later, His Majesty ill-used the Crown-Prince, because he did
not drink hard enough; makes him hunt though ill;" is very hard
upon the poor Crown-Prince,--who, for the rest, "sends loving
messages to England," as usual; [Dubourgay, 16th January.]
covertly meaning the Princess Amelia, as usual. "Some while ago,
I must inform your Lordship, the Prince was spoken to," by Papa as
would appear, "to sound his inclination as to the Princess
Caroline," Princess likewise of England, and whose age, some
eighteen months less than his own, might be suitabler, the
Princess Amelia being half a year his elder; [Caroline born 10th
June 1713; Amelia, 10th July, 1711.] "but,"--mark how true he
stood,--"his Royal Highness broke out into such raptures of love
and passion for the Princess Amelia, and showed so much impatience
for the conclusion of that Match, as gave the King of Prussia a
great deal of surprise, and the Queen as much satisfaction."
Truth is, if an old Brigadier Diplomatist may be judge, "The great
and good qualities of that young Prince, both of person and mind,
deserve a distinct and particular account, with which I shall
trouble your Lordship another day;" [Despatch, 25th December,
1728.]--which unluckily I never did; his Lordship Townshend
having, it would seem, too little curiosity on the subject.

And so the matter wavers; and in spite of Dubourgay's and Queen
Sophie's industry, and the Crown-Prince's willing mind, there
can nothing definite be made of it at this time. Friedrich
Wilhelm goes on visits, goes on huntings; leaves the matter to
itself to mature a little. Thus the negotiation hangs fire;
and will do so,--till dreadful waterspouts come, and perhaps
quench it altogether?


HIS MAJESTY SLAUGHTERS 3,602 HEAD OF WILD SWINE.

His Majesty is off for a Hunting Visit to the Old Dessauer,--
Crown-Prince with him, who hates hunting. Then, "19th January,
1729," says the reverential Fassmann, he is off for a grand hunt
at Copenick; then for a grander in Pommern (Crown-Prince still
with him): such a slaughter of wild swine as was seldom heard of,
and as never occurred again. No fewer than "1,882 head (STUCK) of
wild swine, 300 of them of uncommon magnitude," in the Stettin and
other Pommern regions; "together with 1,720 STUCK in the Mark
Brandenburg, once 450 in a day: in all, 3,602 STUCK." Never was
his Majesty in better spirits: a very Nimrod or hunting Centaur;
trampling the cobwebs of Diplomacy, and the cares of life, under
his victorious hoofs. All this slaughter of swine, 3,602 STUCK by
tale, was done in the season 1729. "From which," observes the
adoring Fassmann, [p. 387.] "is to be inferred the importance," at
least in wild swine, "of those royal Forests in Pommern and the
Mark;" not to speak of his Majesty's supreme talent in hunting, as
in other things.

What Friedrich Wilhelm did with such a mass of wild pork? Not an
ounce of it was wasted, every ounce of it brought money in.
For there exist Official Schedules, lists as for a window-tax or
property-tax, drawn up by his Majesty's contrivance, in the chief
Localities: every man, according to the house he keeps, is bound
to take, at a just value by weight, such and such quotities of
suddenly slaughtered wild swine, one or so many,--and consume them
at his leisure, as ham or otherwise,--cash payable at a fixed
term, and no abatement made. [Forster, Beneckendorf (if they had
an Index I).] For this is a King that cannot stand waste at all;
thrifty himself, and the Cause of thrift.


FALLS ILL, IN CONSEQUENCE; AND THE DOUBLE-MARRIAGE CANNOT GET FORWARD.

This was one of Friedrich Wilhelm's grandest hunting-bouts, this
of January, 1729; at all events, he will never have another such.
By such fierce riding, and defiance of the winter elements and
rules of regimen, his Majesty returned to Potsdam with ill
symptoms of health;--symptoms never seen before; except
transiently, three years ago, after a similar bout; when the
Doctors, shaking their heads, had mentioned the word "Gout."--
"NARREN-POSSEN!" Friedrich Wilhelm had answered, "Gout?"--But now,
February, 1729, it is gout in very deed. His poor Majesty has to
admit: "I am gouty, then! Shall have gout for companion
henceforth. I am breaking up, then?" Which is a terrible message
to a man. His Majesty's age is not forty-one till August coming;
but he has hunted furiously.

Adoring Fassmann gives a quite touching account of Friedrich
Wilhelm's performances under gout, now and generally, which were
begun on this occasion. How he suffered extremely, yet never
neglected his royal duties in any press of pain. Could seldom get
any sleep till towards four or five in the morning, and then had
to be content with an hour or two; after which his Official
Secretaries came in with their Papers, and he signed, despatched,
resolved, with best judgment,--the top of the morning always
devoted to business. At noon, up if possible; and dines, "in
dressing-gown, with Queen and children." After dinner, commonly to
bed again; and would paint in oil; sometimes do light joiner-work,
chiselling and inlaying; by and by lie inactive with select
friends sitting round, some of whom had the right of entry, others
not, under penalties. Buddenbrock, Derschau, rough old Marlborough
stagers, were generally there; these, "and two other persons,"--
Grumkow and Seckendorf, whom Fassmann does not name, lest he get
into trouble,--"sat, well within earshot, round the bed.
And always at the head was TheirO Majesty the Queen, sometimes
with the King's hand laid in hers, and his face turned up to her,
as if he sought assuagement"--O my dim old Friend, let us dry
our tears!

"Sometimes the Crown-Prince read aloud in some French Book," Title
not given; Crown-Prince's voice known to me as very fine.
Generally the Princess Louisa was in the room, too; Louisa, who
became of Anspach shortly; not Wilhelmina, who lies in fever and
relapse and small-pox, and close at death's door, almost since the
beginning of these bad days. The Crown-Prince reads, we say, with
a voice of melodious clearness, in French more or less
instructive. "At other times there went on discourse, about public
matters, foreign news, things in general; discourse of a cheerful
or of a serious nature," always with some substance of sense in
it,--"and not the least smut permitted, as is too much the case in
certain higher circles!" says adoring Fassmann; who privately
knows of "Courts" (perhaps the GLORWURDIGSTE, Glory-worthiest,
August the Great's Court, for one?) "with their hired Tom-Fools,"
not yet an extinct species attempting to ground wit on that bad
basis. Prussian Majesty could not endure any "ZOTEN:" profanity
and indecency, both avaunt. "He had to hold out in this way, awake
till ten o'clock, for the chance of night's sleep." Earlier in the
afternoon, we said, he perhaps does a little in oil-painting,
having learnt something of that art in young times;--there is a
poor artist in attendance, to mix the colors, and do the first
sketch of the thing. Specimens of such Pictures still exist,
Portraits generally; all with this epigraph, FREDERICUS WILHELMUS
IN TORMENTIS PINXIT (Painted by Friedrich Wilhelm in his
torments); and are worthy the attention of the curious. [Fassmann,
p. 392; see Forster, &c.] Is not this a sublime patient?

Fassmann admits, "there might be spurts of IMpatience now and
then; but how richly did Majesty make it good again after
reflection! He was also subject to whims even about people whom he
otherwise esteemed. One meritorious gentleman, who shall be
nameless, much thought of by the King, his Majesty's nerves could
not endure, though his mind well did: 'Makes my gout worse to see
him drilling in the esplanade there; let another do it!'--and
vouchsafed an apologetic assurance to the meritorious gentleman
afflicted in consequence."--O my dim old Friend, these surely are
sublimities of the sick-bed? "So it lasted for some five weeks
long," well on towards the summer of this bad year 1729.
Wilhelmina says, in briefer business language, and looking only at
the wrong side of the tapestry, "It was a Hell-on-Earth to us,
<italic> Les peines du Purgatoire ne pouvaient egaler celles que
NOUS endurions;" <end italic> [i. 157.] and supports the statement
by abundant examples, during those flamy weeks.

For, in the interim, withal, the English negotiation is as good as
gone out; nay there are waterspouts brewing aloft yonder, enough
to wash negotiation from the world. Of which terrible
weather-phenomena we shall have to speak by and by: but must
first, by way of commentary, give a glance at Soissons and the
Terrestrial LIBRA, so far as necessary for human objects,--not
far, by any means.



Chapter V.

CONGRESS OF SOISSONS, SIXTH CRISIS IN THE SPECTRE-HUNT.

The so-called Spanish War, and dangerous futile Siege of
Gibraltar, had not ended at the death of George I.; though
measures had already been agreed upon, by the Kaiser and parties
interested, to end it,--only the King of Spain (or King's Wife, we
should say) made difficulties. Difficulties, she; and kept firing,
without effect, at the Fortress for about a year more; after
which, her humor or her powder being out, Spanish Majesty signed
like the others. Peace again for all and sundry of us:
"Preliminaries" of Peace signed at Paris, 31st May, 1727, three
weeks before George's death; "Peace" itself finally at the Pardo
or at Madrid, the Termagant having spent her powder, 6th March,
1728; [Scholl, ii. 212, 213.] and a "Congress" (bless the mark!)
to settle on what terms in every point.

Congress, say at Aix-la-Chapelle; say at Cambrai again,--for there
are difficulties about the place. Or say finally at Soissons;
where Fleury wished it to be, that he might get the reins of it
better in hand; and where it finally was,--and where the ghost or
name of it yet is, an empty enigma in the memories of some men.
Congress of Soissons did meet, 14th June, 1728; opened itself, as
a Corporeal Entity in this world; sat for above a year;--and did
nothing; Fleury quite declining the Pragmatic Sanction, though the
anxious Kaiser was ready to make astonishing sacrifices, give up
his Ostend COMPANY (Paper Shadow of a Company), or what you will
of that kind,--if men would have conformed.

These Diplomatic gentlemen,--say, are they aught? They seem to
understand me, by each at once his choppy finger laying on his
skinny lips! Princes of the Powers of the Air, Shall we define
them? It is certain the solid Earth or her facts, except being
held in perpetual terror by such workings of the Shadow-world,
reaped no effect from those Twenty Years of Congressing;
Seckendorf himself might as well have lain in bed, as ridden those
25,000 miles, and done such quantities of double-distillations.
No effect at all: only some futile gunpowder spent on Gibraltar,
and splinters of shot and shells (salable as old iron) found about
the rocks there; which is not much of an effect for Twenty Years
of such industry.

The sublime Congress of Soissons met, as we say, at the above date
(just while the Polish Majesty was closing his Berlin Visit);
but found itself no abler for work than that of Cambrai had been.
The Deputies from France I do not mention; nor from Spain, nor
from Austria. The Deputies from England were Colonel or now
properly Brigadier-General Stanhope, afterwards Lord Harrington;
Horace Walpole (who is Robert's Brother, and whose Secretary is
Sir Thomas Robinson, "QUOI DONE, CRUSOE?" whom we shall hear of
farther); and Stephen Poyntz, a once bright gentleman, now dim and
obsolete, whom the readers of Coxe's <italic> Walpole <end italic>
have some nominal acquaintance with. Here, for Chronology's sake,
is a clipping from the old English newspapers to accompany them:
"There is rumor that POLLY PEACHUM is gone to attend the Congress
at Soissons; where, it is thought, she will make as good a figure,
and do her country as much service, as several others that shall
be nameless." [<italic> Mist's Weekly Journal, <end italic> 29th
June, 1728.]

Their task seemed easy to the sanguine mind. The Kaiser has agreed
with Spain in the Italian-Apanage matter; with the Sea-Powers in
regard to his Ostend Company, which is abolished forever:
what then is to prevent a speedy progress, and glad conclusion?
The Pragmatic Sanction. "Accept my Pragmatic Sanction," said the
Kaiser, "let that be the preliminary of all things."--"Not the
preliminary," answered Fleury; "we will see to that as we go on;
not the preliminary, by any means!" There was the rub. The sly old
Cardinal had his private treaties with Sardinia; views of his own
in the Mediterranean, in the Rhine quarter; and answered steadily,
"Not the preliminary, by any means!" The Kaiser was equally
inflexible. Whereupon immensities of protocolling, arguing, and
the Congress "fell into complete languor," say the Histories.
[Scholl, ii. 215.] Congress ate its dinner heartily, and wrote
immensely, for the space of eighteen months; but advanced no
hair's-breadth any-whither; no prospect before it, but that of
dinner only, for unlimited periods.

Kaiser will have his Pragmatic Sanction, or not budge from the
place; stands mulelike amid the rain of cudgellings from the
by-standers; can be beaten to death, but stir he will not.--Hints,
glances of the eye, pass between Elizabeth Farnese and the other
by-standers; suddenly, 9th November, 1729, it is found they have
all made a "TREATY OF SEVILLE" with Elizabeth Farnese; France,
England, Holland, Spain, have all closed,--Italian Apanages to be
at once secured, Ostend to be at once suppressed, with what else
behooves;--and the Kaiser is left alone; standing upon his
Pragmatic Sanction there, nobody bidding him now budge!

At which the Kaiser is naturally thrice and four times wroth and
alarmed;--and Seckendorf in the TABAKS-COLLEGIUM had need to be
doubly busy. As we shall find he is (though without effect), when
the time comes round:--but we have not yet got to November of this
Year 1729; there are still six or eight important months between
us and that. Important months; and a Prussian-English
"Waterspout," as we have named it, to be seen, with due wonder, in
the political sky!--

Congress of Soissons, now fallen mythical to mankind, and as inane
as that of Cambrai, is perhaps still memorable in one or two
slight points. First, it has in it, as one of the Austrian
Deputies, that Baron von Bentenrieder, tallest of living
Diplomatists, who was pressed at one time for a Prussian soldier;
--readers recollect it? Walking through the streets of
Halberstadt, to stretch his long limbs till his carriage came up,
the Prussian sentries laid hold of him, "Excellent Potsdam giant,
this one! "--and haled him off to their guard-house; till carriage
and lackeys came; then, "Thousand humblest pardons, your
Excellenz!" who forgave the fellows. Barely possible some lighter
readers might wish to see, for one moment, an Excellenz that has
been seized by a Press-gang? Which perhaps never happened to any
other Excellenz;--the like of which, I have been told, might merit
him a soiree from strong-minded women, in some remoter parts of
the world. Not to say that he is the tallest of living
Diplomatists; another unique circumstance!--Bentenrieder soon
died; and had his place at Soissons filled up by an Excellenz of
the ordinary height, who had never been pressed. But nothing can
rob the Congress of this fact, that it once had Bentenrieder for
member; and, so far, is entitled to the pluperfect distinction in
one particular.

Another point is humanly interesting in this Congress; but cannot
fully be investigated for want of dates. Always, we perceive,
according to the news of it that reach Berlin,--of England going
right for the Kaiser or going wrong for him,--his Prussian
Majesty's treatment of his children varies. If England go right
for the Kaiser, well, and his Majesty is in good-humor with Queen,
with Crown-Prince and Wilhelmina. If England go wrong for the
Kaiser, dark clouds gather on the royal brow, in the royal heart;
explode in thunder-storms; and at length crockery goes flying
through the rooms, blows descend on the poor Prince's back;
and her Majesty is in tears, mere Chaos come again. For as a
general rule, unless the English Negotiation have some prospering
fit, and produce exceptional phenomena, Friedrich Wilhelm, ever
loyal in heart, stands steadfast by his Kaiser; ever ready "to
strike out (LOS ZU SCHLAGEN," as he calls it) with his best
strength in behalf of a cause which, good soul, he thinks is
essentially German;--all the readier if at any time it seem now
exclusively German, the French, Spanish, English, and other
unlovely Foreign world being clean cut loose from it, or even
standing ranked against it. "When will it go off, then (WANN GEHT
ES LOS)?" asks Friedrich Wilhelm often; diligently drilling his
sixty thousand, and snorting contempt on "Ungermanism
(UNDEUTSCHHEIT)," be it on the part of friends or of enemies.
Good soul, and whether he will ever get Julich aud Berg out of it,
is distractingly problematical, and the Tobacco-Parliament is busy
with him!

Curious to see, so far as dates go, how Friedrich Wilhelm changes
his tune to Wife and Children in exact correspondence to the notes
given out at Soissons for a Kaiser and his Pragmatic Sanction.
Poor Prussian Household, poor back, and heart, of Crown-Prince;
what a concert it is in this world, Smoking Parliament for
souffleur! Let the big Diplomatist Bassoon of the Universe go this
way, there are caresses for a young Soldier and his behavior in
the giant regiment; let the same Bassoon sound that way, bangs and
knocks descend on him; the two keep time together,--so busy is the
Smoking Parliament with his Majesty of Prussia. The world has
seen, with horror and wonder, Friedrich Wilhelm's beating of his
grown children: but the pair of MEERKATZEN, or enchanted
Demon-Apes, disguised as loyal Councillors, riding along with him
the length of a Terrestrial Equator, have not been so familiar to
the world. Seckendorf, Grumkow: we had often heard of
Devil-Diplomatists; and shuddered over horrible pictures of them
in Novels; hoping it was all fancy: but here actually is a pair of
them, transcending all Novels;--perhaps the highest cognizable
fact to be met with in Devil-Diplomacy. And it may be a kind of
comfort to readers, both to know it, and to discern gradually what
the just gods make of it withal. Devil-Diplomatists do exist, at
least have existed, never doubt it farther; and their
astonishingly dexterous mendacities and enchanted spider-webs,--
CAN these go any road but one in this Universe?

That the Congress of Cambrai was not a myth, we convinced
ourselves by a letter of Voltaire's, who actually saw it dining
there in the Year 1722, as he passed that way. Here, for Soissons,
in like manner, are two Letters, by a less celebrated but a still
known English hand; which, as utterances in presence of the fact
itself, leave no doubt on the subject. These the afflicted reader
will perhaps consent to take a glance of. If the Congress of
Soissons, for the sake of memorable objects concerned there, is
still to be remembered, and believed in, for a little while,--the
question arises, How to do it, then?

The writer of these Letters is a serious, rather long-nosed young
English gentleman, not without intelligence, and of a wholesome
and honest nature; who became Lord Lyttelton, FIRST of those
Lords, called also "the Good Lord," father of "the Bad:" a lineal
descendant of that Lyttelton UPON whom Coke sits, or seems to sit,
till the end of things: author by and by of a <italic> History of
Henry the Second <end italic> and other well-meant books: a man of
real worth, who attained to some note in the world. He is now upon
the Grand Tour,--which ran, at that time, by Luneville and
Lorraine, as would appear; at which point we shall first take him
up. He writes to his Father, Sir Thomas, at Hagley among the
pleasant Hills of Worcestershire,--date shortly after the
assembling of that Congress to rear of him;--and we strive to add
a minimum of commentary. The "piece of negligence," the "Mr. D.,"
--none of mortals now knows who or what they were:--

TO SIR THOMAS LYTTELTON, BART., AT HAGLEY.

"LUNEVILLE 21st July" 1728.

"DEAR SIR,--I thank you for so kindly forgiving the piece of
negligence I acquainted you of in my last. Young fellows are often
guilty of voluntary forgetfulness in those affairs; but I assure
you mine was quite accidental:"--Never mind it, my Son! 

"Mr. D. tells you true that I am weary of losing money at cards;
but it is no less certain that without them I shall soon be weary
of Lorraine. The spirit of quadrille [obsolete game at cards] has
possessed the land from morning till midnight; there is nothing
else in every house in Town.

"This Court is fond of strangers, but with a proviso that
strangers love quadrille. Would you win the hearts of the Maids of
Honor, you must lose your money at quadrille; would you be thought
a well-bred man, you must play genteelly at quadrille; would you
get a reputation of good sense, show judgment at quadrille.
However in summer one may pass a day without quadrille; because
there are agreeable promenades, and little parties out of doors.
But in winter you are reduced to play at it, or sleep, like a fly,
till the return of spring.

"Indeed in the morning the Duke hunts,"--mark that Duke, and two
Sons he has. "But my malicious stars have so contrived it, that I
am no more a sportsman than a gamester. There are no men of
learning in the whole Country; on the contrary, it is a character
they despise. A man of quality caught me, the other day, reading a
Latin Author; and asked me, with an air of contempt, Whether I was
designed for the Church? All this would be tolerable if I was not
doomed to converse with a set of English, who are still more
ignorant than the French; and from whom, with my utmost endeavors,
I cannot be absent six hours in the day. Lord" BLANK--Baltimore,
or Heaven-knows-who,--"is the only one among them who has common
sense; and he is so scandalously debauched, in his principles as
well as practice, that his conversation is equally shocking to my
morals and my reason."--Could not one contrive to get away from
them; to Soissons, for example, to see business going on; and the
Terrestrial Balance settling itself a little?

"My only improvement here is in the company of the Duke," who is a
truly distinguished Duke to his bad Country; "and in the exercise
of the Academy,"--of Horsemanship, or what? "I have been absent
from the latter near three weeks, by reason of a sprain I got in
the sinews of my leg. My duty to my dear Mother; I hope you and
she continue well. I am, Sir, your dutiful Son.--G. L."
[<italic> The Works of Lord George Lyttelton, <end italic> by
Ayscough (London, 1776), iii. 215.]

These poor Lorrainers are in a bad way; their Country all trampled
to pieces by France, in the Louis-Fourteenth and still earlier
times. Indeed, ever since the futile Siege of Metz; where we saw
the great Kaiser, Karl V., silently weeping because he could not
recapture Metz, [Antea, vol. v. p. 211.] the French have been busy
with this poor Country;--new sections of it clipt away by them;
"military roads through it, ten miles broad," bargained for;
its Dukes oftenest in exile, especially the Father of this present
Duke: [A famed Soldier in his day; under Kaiser Leopold, "the
little Kaiser in red stockings," one of whose Daughters he had to
wife. He was at the Rescue of Vienna (Sobieski's), and in how many
far fiercer services; his life was but a battle and a march.
Here is his famed Letter to the Kaiser, when death suddenly
called, Halt!

"WELS NEAR LINZ ON THE DONAU, 17th April, 1690.

"SACRED MAJESTY,--According to your Orders, I set out from
Innspruck to come to Vienna; but I am stopped here by a Greater
Master. I go to render account to Him of a life which I had wholly
consecrated to you. Remember that I leave a Wife with whom you are
concerned [QUI ROUS TOUCHE,--who is your lawful Daughter];
Children to whom I can bequeath nothing but my sword; and Subjects
who are under Oppression.

"CHARLES OF LORRAINE."

(Henault, <italic> Abrege Chronologique, <end italic> Paris, 1775,
p. 850).--Charles "V." the French uniformly call this one;
Charles "IV." the Germans, who, I conclude, know better.]--and
they are now waiting a good opportunity to swallow it whole, while
the people are so busy with quadrille parties. The present Duke,
returning from exile, found his Land in desolation, much of it
"running fast to wild forest again;" and he has signalized himself
by unwearied efforts in every direction to put new life into it,
which have been rather successful. Lyttelton, we perceive, finds
improvement in his company. The name of this brave Duke is
Leopold; age now forty-nine; life and reign not far from done:
a man about whom even Voltaire gets into enthusiasm. [Siecle de
Louis XIV. (<italic> OEuvres, <end italic> xxvi. 95-97); Hubner,
t. 281.]

The Court and Country of Lorraine, under Duke Leopold, will prove
to deserve this brief glance from Lyttelton and us. Two sons Duke
Leopold has: the elder, Franz, now about twenty, is at Vienna,
with the highest outlooks there: Kaiser Karl is his Father's
cousin-german; and Kaiser Karl's young Daughter, high beautiful
Maria Theresa,--the sublimest maiden now extant,--yes, this lucky
Franz is to have her: what a prize, even without Pragmatic
Sanction! With the younger son, Karl of Lorraine, Lyttelton may
have made acquaintance, if he cared: a lad of sixteen; by and by
an Austrian General, as his father had been; General much noised
of,--whom we shall often see beaten, in this world, at the head of
men.--But let us now get to Soissons itself, skipping an
intermediate Letter or two:--

TO SIR THOMAS LYTTELTON, BART., AT HAGLEY.

"SOISSONS, 28th October," 1728.

"I thank you, my dear Sir, for complying so much with my
inclinations as to let me stay some time at Soissons: but as you
have not fixed how long, I wait for farther orders.

"One of my chief reasons for disliking Luneville was the multitude
of English there; who, most of them, were such worthless fellows
that they were a dishonor to the name and Nation. With these I was
obliged to dine and sup, and pass a great part of my time. You may
be sure I avoided it as much as possible; but MALGRE MOI I
suffered a great deal. To prevent any comfort from other people,
they had made a law among themselves, not to admit any foreigner
into their company: so that there was nothing but English talked
from June to January.--On the contrary, my countrymen at Soissons
are men of virtue and good sense; they mix perpetually with the
French, and converse for the most part in that language. I will
trouble you no more upon this subject: but give me leave to say
that, however capricious I may have been on other subjects, my
sentiments in this particular are the strongest proofs I ever gave
you of my strong and hereditary aversion to vice and folly.

"Mr. Stanhope," our Minister, the Colonel or Brigadier-General,
"is always at Fontainebleau. I went with Mr. Poyntz," Poyntz not
yet a dim figure, but a brilliant, who hints about employing me,
"to Paris for four days, when the Colonel himself was there, to
meet him; he received me with great civility and kindness. We have
done expecting Mr. Walpole," fixed he in the Court regions;
"who is obliged to keep strict guard over the Cardinal," sly old
Fleury, "for fear the German Ministers should take him from us.
They pull and haul the poor old gentleman so many ways, that he
does not know where to turn, or into whose arms to throw himself."
Never fear him!--

"Ripperda's escape to England,"--grand Diplomatic bulldog that
was, who took refuge in Colonel Stanhope's at Madrid to no
purpose, and kindled the sputtering at Gibraltar, is now got
across to England, and will go to Morocco and farther, to no
purpose,--"will very much embroil affairs; which did not seem to
want another obstacle to hinder them from coming to an
accommodation. If the Devil is not very much wanting to his own
interests in this Business, it is impossible that the good work of
Peace, should go on much longer. After all, most young fellows are
of his party; and wish he may bring matters to a War; for they
make but ill Ministers at a Congress, but would make good Soldiers
in a Campaign.

"No news from Madam" BLANK "and her beloved Husband.
Their unreasonable fondness for each other can never last:
they will soon grow as cold to one another as the Town to
<italic> The Beggars' Opera." <end italic> And cannot warm again,
you think? "Pray Heaven I may prove a false prophet; but Married
Love and English Music are too domestic to continue long
in favor."...

NOVEMBER 20th, SOISSONS still. "This is one of the agreeablest
Towns in France. The people are infinitely obliging to strangers:
we are of all their parties, and perpetually share with them in
their pleasures. I have learnt more French since I came hither,
than I should have picked up in a twelvemonth in Lorraine....

"A fool with a majority on his side is the greatest tyrant in the
world:"--how can I go back to loiter in Lorraine, honored Father,
where fools are in such majority? "Then the extraordinary
civilities I receive from Mr. Poyntz: He has in a manner taken me
into his family;" will evidently make an Apprentice of me.
"The first Packet that comes from Fontainebleau, I expect to be
employed. Which is no small pleasure to me: and will I hope be
of service."...

DECEMBER 20th. "A sudden order to Mr. Poyntz has broken all my
measures. He goes to-morrow to Paris, to stay there in the room of
Messrs. Stanhope and Walpole, who are on their return for
England." Congress falling into complete languor, if we knew it!
But ought not I to accompany this friendly and distinguished
Mr. Poyntz, "who has already given me papers to copy;"--in fact I
am setting off with him, honored Father!...

"Prince Frederick's journey,"--first arrival in England of
dissolute Fred from Hanover, who had NOT been to Berlin to get
married last summer,--"was very secret: Mr. Poyntz did not hear of
it till Friday last; at least he had no public notice of it."
Why should he? "There will be fine struggling for places" in this
Prince's new Household. "I hope my Brother will come in for one."
[Ayscough's <italic> Lyttelton, <end italic> iii. 200-231.]--

But here we pull the string of the curtain upon Lyttelton, and
upon his Congress falling into complete languor; Congress
destined, after dining for about a year more, to explode, in the
Treaty of Seville, and to leave the Kaiser sitting horror-struck,
solitary amid the wreck of Political Nature,--which latter,
however, pieces itself together again for him and others.
Beneficent Treaty of Vienna was at last achieved; Treaty and
Treaties there, which brought matters to their old bearing again,
--Austria united with the Sea-Powers, Pragmatic Sanction accepted
by them, subsidies again to be expected from them; Baby Carlos
fitted with his Apanages, in some tolerable manner; and the
Problem, with which Creation had groaned for some twenty years
past, finally accomplished better or worse.

Lyttelton himself will get a place in Prince Frederick's
Household, and then lose it; place in Majesty's Ministry at last,
but not for a long while yet. He will be one of Prince Frederick's
men, of the Carterets, Chesterfields, Pitts, who "patronize
literature," and are in opposition to dark Walpole; one of the
"West-Wickham set;"--and will be of the Opposition party, and have
his adventures in the world. Meanwhile let him go to Paris with
Mr. Poyntz; and do his wisest there and elsewhere.

       "Who's dat who ride astride de pony,
        So long, so lean, so lank and bony?
        Oh, he be de great orator, Little-ton-y."
[Caricature of 1741, on Lyttelton's getting into the Ministry,
with Carteret, Chesterfield, Argyll, and the rest:
see Phillimore's <italic> Lyttelton <end italic> (London, l845),
i. 110; Johnson's <italic> Lives of the Poets, <end italic>
? Lyttelton; &c. &c.]

For now we are round at Friedrich Wilhelm's Pomeranian Hunting
again, in the New-year's time of 1729; and must look again into
the magnanimous sick-room which ensued thereon; where a small
piece of business is going forward. What a magnanimous patient
Friedrich Wilhelm was, in Fassmann's judgment, we know: but, it
will be good to show both sides of the tapestry, and let
Wilhelmina also speak. The small business is only, a Treaty of
Marriage for one of our Princesses: not Wilhelmina, but Louisa the
next younger, who has been asked, and will consent, as appears.

Fassmann makes a very touching scene of it. King is in bed, ill of
his gout after that slaughter of the 3,602 wild swine: attendants
are sitting round his Majesty, in the way we know; Queen Sophie at
his head, "Seckendorf and several others" round the bed.
Letters arrive; Princess Frederika Louisa, a very young Lady, has
also had a Letter; which, she sees by the seal, will be
interesting, but which she must not herself open. She steps in
with it; "beautiful as an angel, but rather foolish, and a spoilt
child of fifteen," says Wilhelmina: trips softly in with it;
hands it to the King. "Give it to thy Mother, let her read it,"
says the King. Mother reads it, with audible soft voice:
Formal demand in marriage from the Serenity of Anspach,
as foreseen.

"Hearken, Louisa (HORE, LUISE), it is still time," said the King:
"Tell us, wouldst thou rather go to Anspach, now, or stay with me?
If thou choose to stay, thou shalt want, for nothing, either, to
the end of thy life. Speak!"--"At such unexpected question," says
Fassmann, "there rose a fine blush over the Princess's face, who
seemed to be at a loss for her answer. However, she soon collected
herself; kissed his Majesty's hand, and said: 'Most gracious Papa,
I will to Anspach!' To which the King: 'Very well, then; God give
thee all happiness and thousand blessings!--But, hearken, Louisa,'
the King's Majesty was pleased at the same time to add, 'We will
make a bargain, thou and I. You have excellent, Flour at Anspach
(SCHONES MEHL); but in Hams and Smoked Sausages you don't, come
up, either in quality or quantity, to us in this Country. Now I,
for my part, like good pastries. So, from time to time, thou shalt
send me a box of nice flour, and I will keep thee in hams and
sausages. Wilt thou, Louisa?' That the Princess answered Yea,"
says poor Fassmann with the tear in his eye, "may readily be
supposed!" Nay all that heard the thing round the royal bed there
--simple humanities of that kind from so great, a King--had almost
or altogether tears in their eyes. [Fassmann, pp. 393, 394.]

This surely is a very touching scene. But now listen to
Wilhelmina's account of another on the same subject, between the
same parties. "At table;" no date indicated, or a wrong one, but
evidently after this: in fact, we find it was about the beginning
of March, 1729; and had sad consequences for Wilhelmina.

"At table his Majesty told the Queen that he had Letters from
Anspach; the young Margraf to be at Berlin in May for his wedding;
that M. Bremer his Tutor was just coming with the ring of
betrothal for Louisa. He asked my Sister, If that gave her
pleasure? and How she would regulate her housekeeping when
married? My Sister had got into the way of telling him whatever
she thought, and home-truths sometimes, without his taking it ill.
She answered with her customary frankness, That she would have a
good table, which should be delicately served; and, added she,
'which shall be better than yours. And if I have children, I will
not maltreat them like you, nor force them to eat what they have
an aversion to.'--'What do you mean by that?' replied the King:
'what is there wanting at my table?'--'There is this wanting,' she
said, 'that one cannot have enough; and the little there is
consists of coarse potherbs that nobody can eat.' The King," as
was not unnatural, "had begun to get angry at her first answer:
this last put him quite in a fury; but all his anger fell on my
Brother and me. He first threw a plate at my Brother's head, who
ducked out of the way; he then let fly another at me, which I
avoided in like manner. A hail-storm of abuse followed these first
hostilities. He rose into a passion against the Queen; reproaching
her with the bad training she gave her children; and, addressing
my Brother: 'You have reason to curse your Mother,' said he, 'for
it is she that causes your being an ill-governed fellow (UN MAL
GOUVERNE). I had a Preceptor,' continued he, 'who was an honest
man. I remember always a story he told me in my youth. There was a
man, at Carthage, who had been condemned to die for many crimes he
had committed. While they were leading him to execution, he
desired he might speak to his Mother. They brought his Mother:
he came near, as if to whisper something to her;--and bit away a
piece of her ear. I treat you thus, said he, to make you an
example to all parents who take no heed to bring up their children
in the practice of virtue!--Make the application,' continued he,
always addressing my Brother: and getting no answer from him, he
again set to abusing us till he could speak no longer. We rose
from table. As we had to pass near him in going out, he aimed a
great blow at me with his crutch; which, if I had not jerked away
from it, would have ended me. He chased me for a while in his
wheel-chair, but the people drawing it gave me time to escape into
the Queen's chamber." [Wilhelmina, i. 159.]

Poor Wilhelmina, beaten upon by Papa in this manner, takes to bed
in miserable feverish pain, is ordered out by Mamma to evening
party, all the same; is evidently falling very ill. "Ill? I will
cure you!" says Papa next day, and makes her swallow a great
draught of wine. Which completes the thing: "declared small-pox,"
say all the Doctors now. So that Wilhelmina is absent thenceforth,
as Fassmann already told us, from the magnanimous paternal
sick-room; and lies balefully eclipsed, till the paternal gout and
some other things have run their course. "Small-pox; what will
Prince Fred think? A perfect fright, if she do live!" say the
English Court-gossips in the interim. But we are now arrived at a
very singular Prussian-English phenomenon; and ought to take a
new Chapter.



Chapter VI.

IMMINENCY OF WAR OR DUEL BETWEEN THE BRITANNIC AND PRUSSIAN MAJESTIES.

The Double-Marriage negotiation hung fire, in the end of 1728;
but everybody thought, especially Queen Sophie thought, it would
come to perfection; old Ilgen, almost the last thing he did, shed
tears of joy about it. These fine outlooks received a sad shock in
the Year now come; when secret grudges burst out into open flame;
and Berlin, instead of scenic splendors for a Polish Majesty, was
clangorous with note of preparation for imminent War.
Probably Queen Sophie never had a more agitated Summer than this
of 1729. We are now arrived at that thrice-famous Quarrel, or
almost Duel, of Friedrich Wilhelm and his Britannic Brother-in-law
little George II.; and must try to riddle from those distracted
Paper-masses some notice of it, not wholly unintelligible to the
reader. It is loudly talked of, loudly, but alas also loosely to a
degree, in all manner of dull Books; and is at once thrice-famous
and extremely obscure. The fact is, Nature intended it for eternal
oblivion;--and that, sure enough, would have been its fate long
since, had not persons who were then thought to be of no
importance, but are now seen to be of some, stood connected with
it more or less.

Friedrich Wilhelm, for his own part, had seen in the death of
George I. an evil omen from the English quarter; and all along, in
spite of transient appearances to the contrary, had said to
himself, "If the First George, with his solemnities and tacit
sublimities, was offensive now and then, what will the Second
George be? The Second George has been an offence from the
beginning!" In which notions the Smoking Parliament, vitally
interested to do it, in these perilous Soissons times, big with
the fate of the Empire and Universe, is assiduous to confirm his
Majesty. The Smoking Parliament, at Potsdam, at Berlin, in the
solitudes of Wusterhausen, has been busy; and much tobacco, much
meditation and insinuation have gone up, in clouds more abstruse
than ever, since the death of George I.

It is certain, George II. was a proud little fellow; very high and
airy in his ways; not at all the man to Friedrich Wilhelm's heart,
nor reciprocally. A man of some worth, too; "scrupulously kept his
word," say the witnesses: a man always conscious to himself,
"Am not I a man of honor, then?" to a punctilious degree. For the
rest, courageous as a Welf; and had some sense withal,--though
truly not much, and indeed, as it were, none at all in comparison
to what he supposed he had!--One can fancy the aversion of the
little dapper Royalty to this heavy-footed Prussian Barbarian, and
the Prussian Barbarian's to him. The bloody nose in childhood was
but a symbol of what passed through life. In return for his bloody
nose, little George, five years the elder, had carried off
Caroline of Anspach; and left Friedrich Wilhelm sorrowing, a
neglected cub,--poor honest Beast tragically shorn of his Beauty.
Offences could not fail; these two Cousins went on offending one
another by the mere act of living simultaneously. A natural
hostility, that between George II. and Friedrich Wilhelm; anterior
to Caroline of Anspach, and independent of the collisions of
interest that might fall out between them. Enmity as between a
glancing self-satisfied fop, and a loutish thick-soled man of
parts, who feels himself the better though the less successful.
House-Mastiff seeing itself neglected, driven to its hutch, for a
tricksy Ape dressed out in ribbons, who gets favor in the
drawing-room.

George, I perceive by the very State-Papers, George and his
English Lords have a provoking slighting tone towards Friedrich
Wilhelm; they answer his violent convictions, and thoroughgoing
rapid proposals, by brief official negation, with an air of
superiority,--traces of, a polite sneer perceptible, occasionally.
A mere Clown of a King, thinks George; a mere gesticulating
Coxcomb, thinks Friedrich Wilhelm. "MEIN BRUDER DER COMODIANT, My
Brother the Play-actor" (parti-colored Merry-Andrew, of a
high-flying turn)! was Friedrich Wilhelm's private name for him,
in after days. Which George repaid by one equal to it, "My Brother
the Head-Beadle of the Holy Roman Empire,"--"ERZ-SANDSTREUER," who
solemnly brings up the SANDBOX (no blotting-paper yet in use) when
the Holy Roman Empire is pleased to write. "ERZ-SANDSTREUER,
Arch-Sandbox-Beadle of the HEILIGE ROMISCHE REICH;" it is a
lumbering nickname, but intrinsically not without felicity, and
the wittiest thing I know of little George.

Special cause of quarrel they had none that was of the least
significance; and, at this time, prudent friends were striving to
unite them closer and closer, as the true policy for both;
English Townshend himself rather wishing it, as the best Prussian
Officials eagerly did; Queen Sophie passionate for it; and only a
purchased Grumkow, a Seckendorf and the Tobacco-Parliament set
against it. The Treaty of Wusterhausen was not known; but the fact
of some Treaty made or making, some Imperial negotiation always
going on, was too evident; and Friedrich Wilhelm's partialities to
the Kaiser and his Seckendorf could be a secret nowhere.

Negotiation always going on, we say; for such indeed was the
case,--the Kaiser striving always to be loose again (having
excellent reasons, a secret bargain to the contrary, to wit!) in
regard to that Julich-and-Berg Succession; proposing "substitutes
for Julich and Berg;" and Friedrich Wilhelm refusing to accept any
imaginable substitute, anything but the article itself. So that,
I believe, the Treaty of Wusterhausen was never perfectly
ratified, after all; but hung, for so many years, always on the
point of being so. These are the uses of your purchased Grumkow,
and of riding the length of a Terrestrial Equator keeping a
Majesty in company. If, by a Double-Marriage with England, that
intricate web of chicanery had been once fairly slit in two, and
new combinations formed, on a basis not of fast-and-loose, could
it have been of disadvantage to either of the Countries, or to
either of their Kings?--Real and grave causes for agreement we
find; real or grave causes for quarrel none anywhere. But light or
imaginary causes, which became at last effectual, can be
enumerated, to the length of three or four.


CAUSE FIRST: THE HANOVER JOINT-HERITAGES, WHICH ARE NOT IN A LIQUID STATE.

FIRST, the "Ahlden Heritage" was one cause of disagreement, which
lasted long. The poor Mother of George II. and of Queen Sophie had
left considerable properties; "three million THALERS," that is
900,000 pounds, say some; but all was rather in an unliquid state,
not so much as her Will was to be had. The Will, with a 10,000
pounds or so, was in the hands of a certain Graf von Bar, one of
her confidants in that sad imprisonment: "money lent him,"
Busching says, [<italic> Beitrage zur Lebensgeschichte
denkwurdiger Personen <end italic> (Halle, 1783-l789), i. 306,
? NUSSLER. Some distracted fractions of Business Correspondence
with this Bar, in <italic> Memoirs of Sophia Dorothea, <end
italic>--unintelligible as usual there.] "to set up a
Wax-Bleachery at Cassel:"--and the said Count von Bar was off with
it, Testamentary Paper and all; gone to the REICHSHOFRATH at
Vienna, supreme Judges, in the Empire, of such matters.
Who accordingly issued him a "Protection," to start with: so that
when the Hanover people attempted to lay hold of the questionable
wax-bleaching Count, at Frankfurt-on-Mayn,--secretly sending
"a lieutenant and twelve men" for that object,--he producec his
Protection Paper, and the lieutenant and twelve men had to hasten
home again. [Ibid.] Count von Bar had to be tried at law,--never
ask with what results;--and this itself was a long story. Then as
to the other properties of the poor Duchess, question arises, Are
they ALLODIA, or are they FEUDA,--that is to say, shall the Son
have them, or the Daughter? In short, there was no end to
questions. Friedrich Wilhelm has an Envoy at Hanover, one
Kannegiesser, laboring at Hauover, the second of such he has been
obliged to send; who finds plenty of employment in that matter.
"My Brother the COMODIANT quietly put his Father's Will in his
pocket, I have heard; and paid no regard to it (except what he was
compelled to pay, by Chesterfield and others): will he do the like
with his poor Mother's Will?" Patience, your Majesty: he is not a
covetous man, but a self-willed and a proud,--always conscious to
himself that he is the soul of honor, this poor Brother King!

Nay withal, before these testamentary bickerings are settled, here
has a new Joint-Heritage fallen: on which may rise discussions.
Poor Uncle Ernst of Osnabruck--to whom George I., chased by Death,
went galloping for shelter that night, and who could only weep
over his poor Brother dead --has not survived him many months.
The youngest Brother of the lot is now gone too. Electress
Sophie's Seven are now all gone. She had six sons: four became
Austrian soldiers, three of whom perished in war long since;
the other three, the Bishop, the King, the eldest of the Soldiers,
have all died within two years (1726-1728): [Michaelis, i. 153.
See Feder, <italic> Kurfurstinn Sophie; <end italic> Hoppe,
<italic> Geschichte der Stadt Hannover; <end italic> &c.] Sophie
Charlotte, "Republican Queen" of Prussia, Friedrich Wilhelm's
Mother, whom we knew long since, was the one Daughter. Her also
Uncle Ernst saw die, in his youth, as we may remember. They are
all dead. And now the Heritages are to settle, at least the recent
part of them. Let Kannegiesser keep his eyes open. Kannegiesser is
an expert high-mannered man; but said to be subject to sharpness
of temper; and not in the best favor with the Hanover people.
That is Cause FIRST.


CAUSE SECOND: THE TROUBLES OF MECKLENBURG.

Then, secondly, there is the business of Mecklenburg; deplorable
Business for Mecklenburg, and for everybody within wind of it,--
my poor readers included. Readers remember--what reader can ever
forget?--that extraordinary Duke of Mecklenburg, the "Unique of
Husbands," as we had to call him, who camE with his extraordinary
Duchess, to wait on her Uncle Peter, the Russian (say rather
SAMOEIDIC) Czar, at Magdeburg, a dozen years ago? We feared it was
in the fates we might meet that man again; and so it turns out!
The Unique of Husbands has proved also to be the unluckiest of
Misgoverning Dukes in his Epoch; and spreads mere trouble all
round him. Mecklenburg is in a bad way, this long while,
especially these ten years past. "Owing to the Charles-Twelfth
Wars," or whatever it was owing to, this unlucky Duke had fallen
into want of more money; and impoverished Mecklenburg alleged that
it was in no condition to pay more. Almost on his accession, while
the tar-barrels were still blazing, years before we ever saw him,
he demanded new subvention from his RITTERS (the "Squires" of the
Country); subvention new in Mecklenburg, though common in other
sovereign German States, and at one time in Mecklenburg too.
The Ritters would not pay; the Duke would compel them:
Ritters appeal to Kaiser in Reichshofrath, who proves favorable to
the Ritters. Duke still declines obeying Kaiser; asserts that "he
is himself in such matter the sovereign:" Kaiser fulminates what
of rusty thunder he has about him; to which the Duke, flung on his
back by it, still continues contumacious in mind and tongue:
and so between thunder and contumacy, as between hammer and
stithy, the poor Country writhes painfully ever since, and is an
affliction to everybody near it.

For ten years past, the unluckiest of Misgoverning Dukes has been
in utter controversy with his Ritters;--at law with them before
the Courts of the Empire, nay occasionally trying certain of them
himself, and cutting off their heads; getting Russian regiments,
and then obliged to renounce Russian regiments;--in short, a very
great trouble to mankind thereabouts. [Michaelis, ii. 416-435.]
So that the Kaiser in Reichshofrath, about the date indicated
(Year 1719), found good to send military coercion on him;
and intrusted that function to the Hanover-Brunswick people, to
George I. more especially; to whom, as KREIS-HAUPTMANN" ("Captain
of the Circle," Circle of Lower-Saxony, where the contumacy had
occurred), such function naturally fell. The Hanover Sovereignty,
sending 13,000 men, horse, foot and artillery into Mecklenburg,
soon did their function, with only some slight flourishes of
fighting on the part of the contumacious Duke,--in which his chief
Captain, one Schwerin, distinguishes himself: Kurt von Schwerin,
whom we shall know better by and by, for he went into the Prussian
service shortly after. Colonel von Schwerin did well what was in
him; but could not save a refractory Duke, against such odds.
The contumacious Duke was obliged to fly his country;--deposed,
or, to begin with, suspended, a Brother of his being put in as
interim Duke:--and the Unique of Husbands and paragon of
Mismanaging Dukes lives about Dantzig ever since, on a Pension
allowed him by his interim Brother; contumacious to the last;
and still stirring up strife, though now with diminished means,
Uncle Peter being now dead, and Russian help much cut off.

The Hanover Sovereignties did their function soon enough:
but their "expenses for it," these they have in vain demanded ever
since. No money to be got from Mecklenburg; and Mecklenburg owes
us "ten tons of gold,"--that is to say, 1,000,000 thalers, "tou"
being the tenth part of a million in that coin. Hanover,
therefore, holds possession--and has held ever since, with
competent small military force--of certain Districts in
Mecklenburg: Taxes of these will subsist our soldiery in the
interim, and yield interest; the principal once paid, we at once
give them up; principal, by these schedules, if you care to count
them, is one million thalers (ten TONNEN GOLDES, as above said),
or about 150,000 pounds. And so it has stood for ten years past;
Mecklenburg the most anarchic of countries, owing to the kind of
Ritters and kind of Duke it has. Poor souls, it is evident they
have all lost their beaten road, and got among the IGNES FATUI and
peat-pools: none knows the necessities and sorrows of this poor
idle Duke himself! In his young years, before accession, he once
tried soldiering; served one campaign with Charles XII., but was
glad to "return to Hamburg" again, to the peaceable scenes of
fashionable life there. [See <italic> German Spy <end italic>
(London, 1725, by Lediard, Biographer of Marlborough) for a lively
picture of the then Hamburg,--resort of Northern Moneyed Idleness,
as well as of better things.] Then his Russian Unique of Wives:--
his probable adventures, prior and subsequent, in Uncle Peter's
sphere, can these have been pleasant to him? The angry Ritters,
too, their country had got much trampled to pieces in the
Charles-Twelfth Wars, Stralsund Sieges: money seemed necessary to
the Duke, and the Ritters were very scarce of it. Add, on both
sides, pride and want of sense, with mutual anger going on
CRESCENDO; and we have the sad phenomenon now visible: A Duke fled
to Dantzig, anarchic Ritters none the better for his going;
Duke perhaps threatening to return, and much flurrying his poor
interim Brother, and stirring up the Anarchies:--in brief,
Mecklenburg become a house on fire, for behoof of neighbors
and self.

In these miserable brabbles Friedrich Wilhelm did not hitherto
officially interfere; though not uninterested in them; being a
next neighbor, and even, by known treaties, "eventual heir,"
should the Mecklenburg Line die out. But we know he was not in
favor with the Kaiser, in those old years; so the military
coercion had been done by other hands, and he had not shared in
the management at all. He merely watched the course of things;
always advised the Duke to submit to Law, and be peaceable;
was sometimes rather sorry for him, too, as would appear.

Last year, however (1728),--doubtless it was one of Seckendorf's
minor measures, done in Tobacco-Parliament,--Friedrich Wilhelm,
now a pet of the Kaiser's, is discovered to be fairly concerned in
that matter; and is conjoined with the Hanover-Brunswick
Commissioners for Mecklenburg; Kaiser specially requiring that his
Prussian Majesty shall "help in executing Imperial Orders" in the
neighboring Anarchic Country. Which rather huffed little George,--
hitherto, since, his Father's death, the principal, or as good as
sole Commissioner,--if so big a Britannic Majesty COULD be huffed
by paltry slights of that kind! Friedrich Wilhelm, who has much
meditated Mecklenburg, strains his intellect, sometimes to an
intense degree, to find out ways of settling it: George, who has
never cared to meditate it, nor been able if he had, is capable of
sniffing scornfully at Friedrich Wilhelm's projects on the matter,
and dismissing them as moonshine. [Dubourgay Despatches and the
Answers to them (more than once).] To a wise much-meditative
House-Mastiff, can that be pleasant, from an unthinking dizened
creature of the Ape species? The troubles of Mecklenburg, and
discrepancies thereupon, are capable of becoming a SECOND source
of quarrel.


CAUSES THIRD AND FOURTH:--AND CAUSE FIFTH, WORTH ALL THE OTHERS. 

Cause THIRD is the old story of recruiting; a standing cause
between Prussia and all its neighbors. And the FOURTH cause is the
tiniest of all: the "Meadow of Clamei." Meadow of Clamei, some
square yards of boggy ground; which, after long study, one does
find to exist in the obscurest manner, discoverable in the best
Maps of Germany,--some twenty miles south of the Elbe river, on
the boundary between Hanover-Luneburg and Prussia-Magdeburg,
dubious on which side of the boundary. Lonesome unknown Patch of
Meadow, lying far amid peaty wildernesses in those Salzwedel
regions: unknown to all writing mortals as yet; but which
threatens, in this summer of 1729, to become famous as Runnymead
among the Meadows of History! And the FIFTH cause--In short, there
was no real "cause" of the least magnitude; the effect was
produced by the combination of many small and imaginary ones.
For if there is a will to quarrel, we know there is a way.
And perhaps the FIFTH namable cause, in efficiency worth all the
others together, might be found in the Debates of the Smoking
Parliament that season, were the Journal of its Proceedings
extant! We gather symptoms, indisputable enough, of very diligent
elaborations and insinuations there; and conclude that to have
been the really effective cause. Clouds had risen between the two
Courts; but except for the Tobacco-Parliament, there never could
have thunder come from them.

Very soon after George's accession there began clouds to rise;
the perfectly accomplished little George assuming a severe and
high air towards his rustic Brother-in-Law. "We cannot stand these
Prussian enlistments and encroachments; rectify these, in a high
and severe manner!" says George to his Hanover Officials.
George is not warm on his throne till there comes in, accordingly,
from the Hanover Officials a Complaint to that effect, and even a
List of Hanoverian subjects who are, owing to various injustices,
now serving in the Prussian ranks: "Your Prussian Majesty is
requested to return us these men!"

This List is dated 22d January, 1728; George only a few months old
in his new authority as yet. The Prussian Majesty grumbles
painfully responsive: "Will, with eagerness, do whatever is just;
most surely! But is his Britannic Majesty aware? Hanover Officials
are quite misinformed as to the circumstances;"--and does not
return any of the men. Merely a pacific grumble, and nothing done
in regard to the complaints. Then there is the Meadow of Clamei
which we spoke of: "That belongs to Brandenburg, you say?
Nevertheless the contiguous parts of Hanover have rights upon it.
Some 'eight cart-loads of hay,' worth say almost 5 pounds or 10
pounds sterling: who is to mow that grass, I wonder?"--

Friedrich Wilhelm feels that all this is a pettifogging vexatious
course of procedure; and that his little Cousin the COMODIANT is
not treating him very like a gentleman. "Is he, your Majesty!"
suggests the Smoking Parliament.--About the middle of March,
Dubourgay hears Borck, an Official not of the Grumkow party,
sulkily commenting on "the constant hostility of the Hanover
Ministry to us" in all manner of points;---inquires withal, Could
not Mecklenburg be somehow settled, his Prussian Majesty being
somewhat anxious upon it? [Despatch, 17th March, 1729.]
Anxious, yes: his poor Majesty, intensely meditative of such a
matter in the night-watches, is capable of springing out of bed,
with an "Eureka! I have found what will do!" and demanding writing
materials. He writes or dictates in his shirt, the good anxious
Majesty; despatches his Eureka by estafette on the wings of the
wind: and your Townshend, your UNmeditative George, receives it
with curt official negative, and a polite sneer. [Dubourgay,
12th-14th April, 1729; and the Answer from St. James's.]

A few weeks farther on, this is what the Newspapers report of
Mecklenburg, in spite of his Prussian Majesty's desire to have
some mercy shown the poor infatuated Duke: "The Elector of Hanover
and the Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel," his Britannic Majesty and
Squire in that sad business, "REFUSE to withdraw their forces out
of Mecklenburg, or part with the Chest of the Revenues thereof,
until an entire satisfaction be given them for the arrears of the
Charges they have been at in putting the Sentence of the Aulic
Council [Kaiser's REICHSHOFRATH and rusty thunder] into execution
against the said Duke." [Salmon's <italic> Chronological Historian
<end italic> (London, 1748,--a Book never to be quoted without
caution), ii. 216;--date (translated into new style),
10th July, 1729.]

Matters grew greatly worse when George paid his first Visit to
Hanover in character of King, early in the Summer of 1729. Part of
his road lies through Prussian Territory: "Shall he have free
post-horses, as his late Majesty was wont?" asks the Prussian
Official person. "If he write to request them, yes," answers
Friedrich Wilhelm; "if he don't write, no." George does not write;
pays for his post-horses;--flourishes along to Hanover, in
absolute silence towards his clownish Brother-in-Law. You would
say he looks over the head of him, as if there were no such clown
in existence;--he has never yet so much as notified his arrival.
"What is this? There exists no Prussia, then, for little George?"
Friedrich Wilhelm's inarticulate, interjectionary utterances, in
clangorous metallic tone, we can fancy them, now and then; and the
Tobacco-Parliament is busy! British Minister Dubourgay, steady old
military gentleman, who spells imperfectly, but is intent to keep
down mischief, writes at last to Hanover, submissively suggesting,
"Could not, as was the old wont, some notification of the King's
arrival be sent hither, which would console his Prussian Majesty?"
To which my Lord Townshend answers, "Has not been the custom, I am
informed [WRONG informed, your Lordship]; not necessary in the
circumstances." Which is a high course between neighbors and royal
gentlemen and kinsfolk. The Prussian Court hereupon likewise shuts
its lips; no mention of the Hanoverian Court, not even by her
Majesty and to Englishmen, for several weeks past. [Dubourgay.]
Some inarticulate metallic growl, in private, at dinner or in the
TABAKS-COLLEGIUM: the rest is truculent silence. Nor are our poor
Hanover Recruits (according to our List of Pressed Hanoverians) in
the least sent back; nor the Clamei Meadows settled; "Big Meadow"
or "Little one," both of which the Brandenburgers have mown in the
mean time.

Hanover Pressed men not coming home,--I think, not one of them,--
the Hanover Officials decide to seize such Prussian Soldiers as
happen to be seizable, in Hanover Territory. The highway in that
border-country runs now on this side of the march, now on that;--
watch well, and you will get Prussian Soldiers from time to time!
Which the Hanover people do; and seize several, common men and
even officers. Here is once more a high course of proceeding.
Here is coal to raise smoke enough, if well blown upon,--which,
with Seckendorf and Grumkow working the bellows, we may well fancy
it was! But listen to what follows, independently of bellows.

On the 28th June, 1729, hay lying now quite dry upon the Meadow of
Clamei, lo, the Bailiff of Hanoverian Buhlitz, Unpicturesque
Traveller will find the peat-smoky little Village of Buhlitz near
by a dusty little Town called Luchow, midway from Hamburg to
Magdeburg; altogether peaty, mossy country; in the Salzwedel
district, where used to be Wendic populations, and a Marck or
Border Fortress of Salzwedel set up against them:--Bailiff of
Buhlitz, I say, sallies forth with several carts, with all the
population of the Village, with a troop of horse to escort, and
probably flags flying and some kind of drums beating;--publicly
rakes together the hay, defiant of the Prussian Majesty and all
men; loads it on his carts, and rolls home with it; leaving to the
Brandenburgers nothing but stubble and the memory of having mown
for Hanover to eat. This is the 28th June, 1729; King of Prussia
is now at Magdeburg, reviewing his troops; within a hundred miles
of these contested quag-countries: who can blame him that he
flames up now into clear blaze of royal indignation?
The correspondence henceforth becomes altogether lively:
but in the Britannic Archives there is nothing of it,--Dubourgay
having received warning from my Lord Townshend to be altogether
ignorant of the matter henceforth, and let the Hanover Officials
manage it. His Prussian Majesty returns home in the most
tempestuous condition.

We may judge what a time Queen Sophie had of it; what scenes there
were with Crown-Prince Friedrich and Wilhelmina, in her Majesty's
Apartment and elsewhere! Friedrich Wilhelm is fast mounting to the
red-hot pitch. The bullyings, the beatings even, of these poor
Children, love-sick one of them, are lamentable to hear of, as all
the world has heard:--"Disobedient unnatural whelps, biting the
heels of your poor old parent mastiff in his extreme need, what is
to be done with you?" Fritz he often enough beats, gives a slap to
with his rattan; has hurled a plate at him, on occasion, when bad
topics rose at table; nay at Wilhelmina too, she says: but the
poor children always ducked, and nothing but a little noise and
loss of crockery ensued. Fritz he deliberately detests, as a
servant of the Devil, incorrigibly rebelling against the paternal
will, and going on those dissolute courses: a silly French
cockatoo, suspected of disbelief in Scripture; given to nothing
but fifing and play-books; who will bring Prussia aud himself to a
bad end. "God grant he do not finish on the gallows!" sighed the
sad Father once to Grumkow. The records of these things lie
written far and wide, in the archives of many countries as well as
in Wilhelmina's Book.

To me there was one undiplomatic reflection continually present:
Heavens, could nobody have got a bit of rope, and hanged those two
Diplomatic swindlers; clearly of the scoundrel genus, more than
common pickpockets are? Thereby had certain young hearts, and
honest old ones too, escaped being broken; and many a thing might
have gone better than it did. JARNI-BLEU, Herr Feldzeugmeister,
though you are an orthodox Protestant, this thousand-fold
perpetual habit of distilled lying seems to me a bad one. I do not
blame an old military gentleman, with a brow so puckered as yours,
for having little of the milk of human kindness so called:
but this of breaking, by force of lies merely, and for your own
uses, the hearts of poor innocent creatures, nay of grinding them
slowly in the mortar, and employing their Father's hand to do it
withal; this--Herr General, forgive me, but there are moments when
I feel as if the extinction of probably the intensest scoundrel of
that epoch might have been a satisfactory event!--Alas, it could
not be. Seckendorf is lying abroad for his Kaiser; "the only
really able man we have," says Eugene sometimes. Snuffles and
lisps; and travels in all, as they count, about 25,000 miles,
keeping his Majesty in company. Here are some glimpses into the
interior, dull but at first-hand, which are worth clipping and
condensing from Dubourgay, with their dates:--

30th JULY, 1729. To the respectable old Brigadier, this day or
yesterday, "her Majesty, all in tears, complained of her
situation: King is nigh losing his senses on account of the
differences with Hanover; goes from bed to bed in the
night-time, and from chamber to chamber, 'like one whose brains
are turned.' Took a fit, at two in the morning, lately, to be off
to Wusterhausen:"--about a year ago Seckendorf and Grumkow had
built a Lodge out there, where his Majesty, when he liked, could
be snug and private with them: thither his Majesty now rushed, at
two in the morning; but seemingly found little assuagement.
"Since his return, he gives himself up entirely to drink:--
Seckendorf," the snuffling Belial, "is busy, above ground and
below; has been heard saying He alone could settle these
businesses, Double-Marriage and all, would her Majesty but
trust him!"--

"The King will not suffer the Prince-Royal to sit next his Majesty
at table, but obliges him to go to the lower end; where things are
so ordered," says the sympathetic Dubourgay, "that the poor Prince
often rises without getting one bit,"--woe's me! "Insomuch that
the Queen was obliged two days ago [28th July, 1729, let us date
such an occurrence] to send, by one of the servants who could be
trusted, a Box of cold fowls and other eatables for his Royal
Highness's subsistence!" [Dubourgay, 30th July, 1729.]

In the first blaze of the outrage at Clamei, Friedrich Wilhelm's
ardent mind suggested to him the method of single combat: defiance
of George, by cartel, To give the satisfaction of a gentleman.
There have been such instances on the part of Sovereigns;
though they are rare: Karl Ludwig of the Pfalz, Winter-king's Son,
for example, did, as is understood, challenge Turenne for burning
the Pfalz (FIRST burning that poor country got); but nothing came
of it, owing to Turenne's prudence. Friedrich Wilhelm sees well
that it all comes from George's private humor: Why should human
blood be shed except George's and mine? Friedrich Wilhelm is
decisive for sending off the cartel; he has even settled the
particulars, and sees in his glowing poetic mind how the
transaction may be: say, at Hildesheim for place; Derschau shall
be my second; Brigadier Sutton (if anybody now know such a man)
may be his. Seconds, place and general outline he has schemed out,
and fixed, so far as depends on one party; will fairly fence and
fight this insolent little Royal Gentleman; give the world a
spectacle (which might have been very wholesome to the world) of
two Kings voiding their quarrel by duel and fair personal fence.

In England the report goes, "not without foundation," think Lord
Hervey and men of sarcastic insight in the higher circles, That it
was his Britannic Majesty who "sent or would have sent a challenge
of single combat to his Prussian Majesty," the latter being the
passive party! Report flung into an INVERSE posture, as is liable
to happen; "going" now with its feet uppermost; "not without
foundation," thinks Lord Hervey. "But whether it [the cartel] was
carried and rejected, or whether the prayers and remonstrances of
Lord Townshend prevented the gauntlet being actually thrown down,
is a point which, to me [Lord Hervey] at least, has never been
cleared." [Lord Hervey, <italic> Memoirs of George II. <end
italic> (London, 1848), i. 127.]

The Prussian Ministers, no less than Townshend would, feel well
that this of Duel will never do. Astonishment, FLEBILE LULIBRIUM,
tragical tehee from gods and men, will come of the Duel! But how
to turn it aside? For the King is determined. His truculent
veracity of mind points out this as the real way for him;
reasoning, entreating are to no purpose. "The true method, I tell
you! As to the world and its cackling,--let the world cackle!"
At length Borck hits on a consideration: "Your Majesty has been
ill lately; hand perhaps not so steady as usual? Now if it should
turn out that your Majesty proved so inferior to yourself as to--
Good Heavens!" This, it is said, was the point that staggered his
Majesty. Tobacco-Parliament, and Borck there, pushed its
advantage: the method of duel (prevalent through the early part of
July, I should guess) was given up. [Bielfeld, <italic> Lettres
familieres et autres <end italic> (Second edition, 2 vols. Leide,
1767), i. 117, 118.] Why was there no Hansard in that Institution
of the Country? Patience, idle reader! We shall get some scraps of
the Debates on other subjects, by and by.--But hear Dubourgay
again, in the absence of Morning Newspapers:--

AUGUST 9th, 1729. "Berlin looks altogether warlike. At Magdeburg
they are busy making ovens to bake Ammunition-bread; Artillery is
getting hauled out of the Arsenal here;" all is clangor, din of
preparation. "It is said the King will fall on Mecklenburg;" can
at once, if he like. "These intolerable usages from England
[Seckendorf is rumored to have said], can your Majesty endure them
forever? Why not marry the Prince-Royal, at once, to another
Princess, and have done with them!"--or words to that effect, as
reported by Court-rumor to her Majesty and Dubourgay. And there is
a Princess talked of for this Match, Russian Princess, little
Czar's Sister (little Czar to have Wilhelmina, Double-Marriage to
be with Russia, not with England); but the little Czar soon died,
little Czar's Sister went out of sight, or I know not what
happened, and only brief rumor came of that.

As for the Crown-Prince, he has not fallen desperate; no;
but appears to have strange schemes in him, deep under cover.
"He has said to a confidant [Wilhelmina, it is probable], 'As to
his ill-treatment, he well knew how to free himself of that [will
fly to foreign parts, your Highness?], and would have done so long
since, were it not for his Sister, upon whom the whole weight of
his Father's resentment would then fall. Happen what will,
therefore, he is resolved to share with her all the hardships
which the King his Father may be pleased to put upon her."
[Dubourgay, 11th August, 1729.] Means privately a flight to
England, Dubourgay sees, and in a reticent diplomatic way is glad
to see.

I possess near a dozen Hanoverian and Prussian Despatches upon
this strange Business; but should shudder to inflict them on any
innocent reader. Clear, grave Despatches, very brief and just,
especially on the Prussian side: and on a matter too, which truly
is not lighter than any other Despatch matter of that
intrinsically vacant Epoch:--O reader, would I could bury all
vacant talk and writing whatsoever, as I do these poor Despatches
about the "eight cart-loads of hay"! Friedrich Wilhelm is
fair-play itself; will do all thinge, that Earth or Heaven can
require of him. Only, he is much in a hurry withal; and of this
the Hanover Officials take advantage, perhaps unconsciously, to
keep him in provocation. He lies awake at night, his heart is
sore, and he has fled to drink. Towards the middle of August,--
here again is a phenomenon,--"he springs out of bed in the middle
of night," has again an EUREKA as to this of Clamei: "Eureka, I
see now what will bring a settlement!" and sends off post-haste to
Kannegiesser at Hanover. To Kannegiesser,--Herr Reichenbach, the
special Envoy in this matter, being absent at the moment, gone to
the Gohrde, I believe, where Britannic Majesty itself is:
but Kannegiesser is there, upon the Ahlden Heritages; acquainted
with the ground, a rather precise official man, who will serve for
the hurry we are in. Post-haste; dove with olive-branch cannot go
too quick;--Kannegiesser applying for an interview, not with the
Britannic Majesty, who is at Gohrde, hunting, but with the Hanover
Council, is--refused admittance. Here are Herr Kannegiesser's
official Reports; which will themselves tell the rest of the
story, thank Heaven:--

TO HIS PRUSSIAN MAJESTY (From Herr Kannegiesser).

No. 1. "DONE AT HANOVER, 15th AUGUST, 1729.

"On the 15th day of August, at ten o'clock in the morning, I
received Two Orders of Council [these are THE EUREKA, never ask
farther what they are]; despatched on the 13th instant at seven in
the evening; whereupon I immediately went to the Council-chamber
here; and informed the Herr von Hartoff, Private Secretary, who
met me in a room adjoining, 'That, having something to propose to
his Ministry [now sitting deliberative in the interior here;
something to propose to his Ministry] on the part of the Prussian
Ministers, it was necessary I should speak to them.' Herr von
Hartoff, after having reported my demand, let me know, 'He had
received orders from the Ministry to defer what I had to say to
another time.'

"I replied, 'That, since I could not be allowed the honor of an
audience at that time, I thought myself obliged to acquaint him I
had received an Order from Berlin to apply to the Ministry of this
place, in the name of the Ministers of Prussia, and make the most
pressing instances for a speedy Answer to a Letter lately
delivered to them by Herr Hofrath Reichenbath [my worthy Assistant
here; Answer to his Letter in the first place]; and to desire that
the Answer might be lodged in my hands, in order to remit it
with safety.'

"Herr von Hartoff returned immediately to the Council-chamber;
and after having told the Ministers what I had said, brought me
the following answer, in about half-a-quarter of an hour [seven
minutes by the watch]: 'That the Ministers of this Court would not
fail answering the said Letter as soon as possible; and would take
care to give me notice of it, and send the Answer to me.'"

That was all that the punctual Kannegiesser could get out of them.
"But," continues he, "not thinking this reply sufficient, I added,
'That delays being dangerous, I would come again the next day for
a more precise answer.'"

Rather a high-mannered positive man, this Kannegiesser, of the
Ahlden Heritages; not without sharpness of temper, if the Hanover
Officials drive it too far.


No. 2.--"AT HANOVER, 16th AUGUST, 1729.

"According to the orders received from the King my Master, and
pursuant of my promise of yesterday, I went at noon this day to
the Castle (SCHLOSS), for the purpose, of making appearance in the
Council-chamber, where the Ministers were assembled.

"I let them know I was there, by Van Hartoff, Privy Secretary;
and, in the mildest terms, desired to be admitted to speak with
them. Which was refused me a second time; and the following answer
delivered me by Van Hartoff: 'That since the Prussian Ministers
had intrusted me with this Commission, the Ministers of this Court
had directed him to draw up my yesterday's Proposals in writing,
and report them to the Council.'

"Whereupon I said, 'I could not conceive any reason why I was the
only person who could not be admitted to audience. That, however,
as the Ministers of this Court were pleased to authorize him, Herr
von Hartoff, to receive my Proposals, I was obliged to tell him,'
as the first or preliminary point of my Commission, 'I had
received orders to be very pressing with the said Ministers of
this Court, for an Answer to a Letter from the Prussian Ministry,
lately delivered by Herr Legationsrath von Reichenbach;
and finding that the said Answer was not yet finished, I would
stay two days for it, that I might be more secure of getting it.
But that then I should come to put them in mind of it, and desire
audience in order to acquit myself of the REST of my Commission.'

"The Privy Secretary drew up what I said in writing. Immediately
afterwards he reported it to the Ministry, and brought me this
answer: 'That the Ministers of this Court would be as good as
their word of yesterday, and answer the above-mentioned Letter
with all possible expedition.' After which we parted."


No. 3.--"AT HANOVER, 17th AUGUST, 1729

"At two in the afternoon, this day, Herr von Hartoff came to my
house; and let me know 'He had business of consequence from the
Ministry, and that he would return at five.' By my direction he
was told, 'I should expect him.'

"At the time appointed he came; and told me, 'That the Ministers
of the Court, understanding from him that I designed to ask
audience to-morrow, did not doubt but my business would be to
remind them of the Answer which I had demanded yesterday and the
day before. That such applications were not customary among
sovereign Princes; that they, the Ministers; 'dared not treat
farther in that affair with me; that they desired me not to
mention it to them again till they had received directions from
his Britannic Majesty, to whom they had made their report;
and that as soon as they received their instructions, the result
of these should be communicated to me.'

"To this I replied, 'That I did not expect the Ministers of this
Court would refuse me the audience which I designed to ask
to-morrow; and that therefore I would not fail of being at the
Council-chamber at eleven, next day,' according to bargain, 'to
know their answer to the rest of my Proposals.'--Secretary Von
Hartoff would not hear of this resolution; and assured me
positively he had orders to listen to nothing more on the subject
from me. After which he left me?"


No. 4.--"AT HANOVER, 18th AUGUST, 1729.

"At eleven, this day, I went to the Council-chamber, for the third
time; and desired Secretary Hartoff 'To prevail with the Ministry
to allow me to speak with them, and communicate what the King of
Prussia had ordered me to propose.'

"Herr von Hartoff gave them an account of my request; and brought
me for answer, 'That I must wait a little, because the Ministers
were not yet all assembled.'" Which I did. "But after having made
me stay almost an hour, and after the President of the Council was
come, Herr von Hartoff came out to me; and repeated what he had
said yesterday, in very positive and absolute terms, 'That the
Ministers were resolved not to see me, and had expressly forbid
him taking any Paper at my hands.'

"To which I replied, 'That this was very hard usage; and the world
would see how the King of Prussia would relish it. But having
strict orders from his Majesty, my most gracious Master, to make a
Declaration to the Ministers of Hanover in his name; and finding
Herr von Hartoff would neither receive it, nor take a copy of it,
I had only to tell him that I was under the necessity of leaving
it in writing,--and had brought the Paper with me,'" let Herr von
Hartoff observe!--"'And that now, as the Council were pleased to
refuse to take it, I was obliged to leave the said Declaration on
a table in an adjoining room, in the presence of Herr von Hartoff
and other Secretaries of the Council, whom I desired to lay it
before the Ministry.'

"After this I went home; but had scarcely entered my apartment,
when a messenger returned me the Declaration, still sealed as I
left it, by order of the Ministers: and perceiving I was not
inclined to receive it, he laid it on my table, and immediately
left the house." [A Letter from an English Traveller to his Friend
at London, relating to the Differences betwixt the Courts of
Prussia and Hanover, with Copies of, &c. Translated from the
French (London, A. Millar, at Buchanan's Head, 1730), pp. 29-34.
An excellent distinct little Pamphlet; very explanatory in this
matter,--like the smallest rushlight in a dark cellar of
shot-lumber.]

Whereupon Kannegiesser, without loss of a moment, returns to
Berlin, 19th August; and reports progress.

Simple honest Orson of a Prussian Majesty, what a bepainted,
beribboned insulting Play-actor Majesty has he fallen in with!--
"Hm, so? Hm, na!" and I see the face of him, all colors of the
prism, and eyes in a fine frenzy; betokening thundery weather to
some people! Instantly he orders 44,000 men to get on march;
[Friedrich Wilhelm's "Manifesto" is in <italic> Mauvillon, <end
italic> ii. 210-215, dated "20th August, 1729" (the day after
Kannegieseer's return).] and these instantly begin to stir;
small preparation needed, ever-ready being the word with them.
From heavy guns, ammunition-wagons and draught-horses, down to the
last buckle of a spatterdash, things are all ticketed and ready in
his Majesty's country; things, and still more evidently men.
Within a week, the amazed Gazetteers {Newspaper Editors we now
call them) can behold the actual advent of horse, foot and
artillery regiments at Magdeburg; actual rendezvous begun, and
with a frightful equable velocity going on day after day. On the
15th day of September, if Fate's almanac hold steady, there will
be 44,000 of them ready there. Such a mass of potential-battle as
George or the  Hanover Officiality are--ready to fight?

Alas, far enough from that. Forces of their own they have, after a
sort; subsidized Hessians, Danes, these they can begin to stir up;
but they have not a regiment ready for fighting; and have NOTHING,
if all were ready, which this 44,000 cannot too probably sweep out
of the world. I suppose little George must have exhibited some
prismatic colors of countenance, too. This insulted Orson is
swinging a tremendous club upon the little peruked ribboned high
gentleman, promenading loftily in his preserves yonder!
The Prussian forces march, steady, continual; Crown-Prince
Friedrich's regiment of Giants is on march, expressly under charge
of Friedrich himself:--the young man's thoughts are not recorded
for us; only that he gets praise from his Father, so dexterous and
perfect is he with the Giants and their getting into gear. Nor is
there, says our Foreign Correspondent, the least truth, in your
rumor that the Prussian forces, officers or men, marched with bad
will; "conspicuously the reverse is the truth, as I myself can
testify." [Pamphlet cited above.] And his Britannic Majesty, now
making a dreadful flutter to assemble as fast as possible, is like
to get quite flung into the bogs by this terrible Orson!--

What an amazement, among the Gazetteers: thunder-clouds of war
mounting up over the zenith in this manner, and blotting out the
sun; may produce an effect on the Congress of Soissons?
Presumably: and his Imperial Majesty, left sitting desolate on his
Pragmatic Sanction, gloomily watching events, may find something
turn up to his advantage? Prussia and England are sufficiently in
quarrel, at any rate; perhaps almost too much.--The Pope, in these
circumstances, did a curious thing. The Pope, having prayed lately
for rain and got it, proceeds now, in the end of September, while
such war-rumors are still at their height in Rome, to pray, or
even do a Public Mass, or some other so-called Pontificality,
"in the Chapel of Philip Neri in the New Church," by way of still
more effectual miracle. Prays, namely, That Heaven would be
graciously pleased to foment, and blow up to the proper degree,
this quarrel between the two chief Heretic Powers, Heaven's chief
enemies, whereby Holy Religion might reap a good benefit, if it
pleased Heaven. But, this time, the miracle did not go off
according to program. ["Extract of a Letter from Rome, 24th
September, 1729," in Townshend's Despatch, Whitehall, 10th
Outober, 1729.]

For at this point, before the Pope had prayed, but while the
troops and artillery were evidently all on march ("Such an
artillery as I," who am Kaiser's Artillery-Master, "for my poor
part, never had the happiness to see before in any country,"
snuffles Seckendorf in the Smoking Parliament), and now swords
are, as it were, drawn, and in the air make horrid circles,--the
neighbors interfere: "Heavens I put up your swords!"--and the huge
world-wide tumult suddenly (I think, in the very first days of
this month September) collapses, sinks into something you can put
into a snuff-box.

Of course it could never come to actual battle, after all.
Too high a pickle-herring tragedy that. Here is a COMODIANT not
wanting to be smitten into the bogs; an honest Orson who wants
nothing, nor has ever wanted, but fair-play. Fair-play; and not to
be insulted on the streets, or have one's poor Hobby quite knocked
from under one!--Neighbors, as we say, struck in; France, Holland,
all the neighbors, at this point: "Do it by arbitration;
Wolfenbuttel for the one, Sachsen-Gotha for the other;
Commissioners to meet at Brunswick!" And that, accordingly, was
the course fixed upon; and settlement, by that method, was
accomplished, without difficulty, in some six months hence.
[16th April, 1730 (Forster, ii. 105).] Whether Clamei was awarded
to Hanover or to Brandenburg, I never knew, or how the hay of it
is cut at this moment. I only know there was no battle on the
subject; though at one time there was like to be such a clash of
battle as the old Markgraves never had with their old Wends;
not if we put all their battlings into one.

Seckendorf's radiant brow has to pucker itself again: this fine
project, of boiling the Kaiser's eggs by setting the world on
fire, has not prospered after all. The gloomy old villain came to
her Majesty one day, [Dubourgay, 30th July, 1729.] while things
were near the hottest; and said or insinuated, He was the man that
could do these businesses, and bring about the Double-Marriage
itself, if her Majesty were not so harsh upon him. Whereupon her
Majesty, reporting to Dubourgay, threw out the hint, "What if we
(that is, you) did give him a forty or fifty thousand thalers
verily, for he will do anything for money?" To which Townshend
answers from the Gohrde, to the effect: "Pooh, he is a mere bag of
noxious futilities; consists of gall mainly, and rusty old lies
and crotchets; breathing very copperas through those old choppy
lips of his: let him go to the--!" Next Spring, at the happy end
of the Arbitration, which he had striven all he could to mar and
to retard, he fell quite ill; took to his bed for two days,--
colics, or one knows not what;--"and I can't say I am very sorry
for him," writes the respectable Dubourgay. [25th April, 1730.]
On the 8th day of September, 1729, Friedrich Crown-Prince
re-enters Potsdam [Ib. 11th Sept. 1729.] with his two battalions
of Giants; he has done so well, the King goes out from Berlin to
see him march in with them; rejoicing to find something of a
soldier in the young graceless, after all. "The King distributed
100,000 thalers (15,000 pounds) among his Army;" being well
pleased with their behavior, and doubtless right glad to be out of
such a Business. The Ahlden Heritages will now get liquidated;
Mecklenburg,--our Knyphausen, with the Hanover Consorts, will
settle Mecklenburg; and all shall be well again, we hope!--

The fact, on some of these points, turned out different; but it
was now of less importance. As to Knyphausen's proceedings at
Mecklenburg, after the happy Peace, they were not so successful as
had been hoped. Need of quarrel, however, between the Majesties,
there henceforth was not in Mecklenburg; and if slight rufflings
and collisions did arise, it was not till after our poor
Double-Marriage was at any rate quite out of the game, and they
are without significance to us. But the truth is, though
Knyphausen did his best, no settlement came; nor indeed could ever
come. Shall we sum up that sorry matter here, and wash our hands
of it?


TROUBLES OF MECKLENBURG, FOR THE LAST TIME.

Knyphausen, we say, proved futile; nor could human wit have
succeeded. The exasperated Duke was contumacious, irrational;
the two Majesties kept pulling different ways upon him.
Matters grew from very bad to worse; and Mecklenburg continued
long a running sore. Not many months after this (I think, still in
1729), the irrational Duke, having got money out of Russia, came
home again from Dantzig; to notable increase of the Anarchies in
Mecklenburg, though without other result for himself.
The irrational Duke proved more contumacious than ever, fell into
deeper trouble than ever;--at length (1733) he made Proclamation
to the Peasantry to rise and fight for him; who did turn out, with
their bill-hooks and bludgeons, under Captains named by him, "to
the amount of 18,000 Peasants,"--with such riot as may be fancied,
but without other result. So that the Hanover Commissioners
decided to seize the very RESIDENZ Cities (Schwerin and Domitz)
from this mad Duke, and make the country clear of him,--his
Brother being Interim Manager always, under countenance of the
Commissioners. Which transactions, especially which contemplated
seizure of the Residence Cities, Friedrich Wilhelm, eventual heir,
could not see with equanimity at all. But having no forces in the
country, what could he do? Being "Joint-Commissioner" this long
while past, though without armed interference hitherto, he
privately resolves that he will have forces there; the rather as
the poor Duke professes penitence, and flies to him for help.
Poor soul, his Russian Unique of Wives has just died, far enough
away from him this long while past: what a life they have had,
these two Uniques!--

Enough, "on the 19th of October, 1733, Lieutenant-General
Schwerin,"--the same who was Colonel Schwerin, the Duke's chief
Captain here, at the beginning of these troubles, now
Lientenant-General and a distinguished PRUSSIAN officer,--
"marches into Mecklenburg with three regiments, one of foot, two
of horse:" [Buchholz, i. 122, 142; Michaelis, ii. 433, 437.] he,
doubtless, will help in quelling those Peasant and other
Anarchies? Privately his mission is most delicate. He is not to
fight with the Hanoverians; is delicately but effectually to shove
them well away from the Residence Cities, and fasten himself down
in those parts. Which the Lieutenant-General dexterously does.
"A night's quarter here in Parchim,"--such is the
Lieutenant-General's request, polite but impressive, from the
outskirts of that little Town, a Town essential to certain
objects, and in fact the point he is aiming at: "night's quarter;
you cannot refuse it to this Prussian Company marching under the
Kaiser's Commission?" No, the Hanoverian Lieutenant of Foot dare
not take upon him to refuse:--but next morning, he is himself
invited to withdraw, the Prussians having orders to continue here
in Parchim! And so with the other points and towns, that are
essential in the enterprise on hand. A dexterous
Lieutenant-General this Schwerin:--his two Horse-Colonels are
likewise men to be noted; Colonel Wreech, with a charming young
Wife, perhaps a too charming; Colonel Truchsess von Waldburg,
known afterwards, with distinction, in London Society and widely
otherwise. And thus, in the end of 1733, the Mecklenburg Residence
Cities, happen what may, are secured for their poor irrational
Duke. These things may slightly ruffle some tempers at Hanover;
but it is now 1733, and our poor Double-Marriage is clean out of
the game by that time!--

The irrational Duke could not continue in his Residence Cities,
with the Brother administering over him; still proving
contumacious, he needed absolutely to be driven out, to Wismar or
I know not whither; went wandering about for almost twenty years
to come; disturbed, and stirring up disturbance. Died 1747, still
in that sad posture; Interim Brother, with Posterity, succeeding.
[Michaelis, ii. 434-440.] But Hanover and Prussia interfered no
farther; the brother administered on his own footing, "supported
by troops hired from Hamburg. Hanover and Prussia, 400
Hanoverians, 200 Prussians, merely retained hold of their
respective Hypothecs [Districts held in pawn] till the expenses
should be paid,"--million of THALERS, and by those late anarchies
a new heavy score run up.

Prussia and Hanover retained hold of their Hypothecs; for as to
the expenses, what hope was there? Fifty years hence we find the
Prussian Hypothecs occupied as at first; and "rights of enlistment
exercised." Never in this world were those expenses paid;--nor
could be, any part of them. The last accounts were: George III. of
England, on marrying, in 1761, a Mecklenburg Princess,--"Old Queen
Charlotte," then young enough,--handsomely tore up the bill;
and so ended that part of a desperate debt. But of the Prussian
part there was no end, nor like to be any: "down to this day [says
Buchholz, in 1775], two squadrons of the Ziethen Hussars usually
lie there," and rights of enlisting are exercised. I conclude, the
French Revolution and its Wars wiped away this other desperate
item. And now let us hope that Mecklenburg is better off than
formerly,--that, at least, our hands are clear of it in time
coming. I add only, with satisfaction, that this Unique of Dukes
was no ancestor of Old Queen Charlotte's, but only a remote
Welsh-Uncle, far enough apart;--cannot be too far.

ONE NUSSLER SETTLES THE AHLDEN HERITAGES; SENDS THE MONEY HOME IN BOXES.

Knyphausen did not settle Mecklenburg, as we perceive! Neither did
Kannegiesser and the unliquidated Heritages prosper, at Hanover,
quite to perfection. One Heritage, that of Uncle Osnabruck, little
George flatly refused to share: FEUDUM the whole of that, not
ALLODIUM any part of it, so that a Sister cannot claim. Which, I
think, was confirmed by the Arbitrators at Brunswick;
thereby ending that. Then as to the Ahlden ALLODIA or FEUDA,--
Kannegiesser, blamably or not, never could make much of the
business. A precise strict man, as we saw at the Hanover
Council-room lately; whom the Hanover people did not like. So he
made little of it. Nay at the end of next year (December, 1730),
sending in his accounts to Berlin, he demands, in addition to the
three thalers (or nine shillings) daily allowed him, almost a
second nine shillings for sundries, chiefly for "hair-powder and
shoe-blacking"! And is instantly recalled; and vanishes from
History at this point. [Busching, <italic> Beitrage, <end italic>
i. 307, &c. ? Nussler.] 

Upon which Friedrich Wilhelm selects another; "sends deal boxes
along with him," to bring home what cash there is. This one's name
is Nussler; an expectant Prussian Official, an adroit man, whom we
shall meet again doing work. He has the nine shillings a day,
without hair-powder or blacking, while employed here; at Berlin no
constant salary whatever,--had to "borrow 75 pounds for outfit on
this business;"--does a great deal of work without wages, in hope
of effective promotion by and by. Which did follow, after tedious
years; Friedrich Wilhelm finding him, on such proof (other proof
will not do), FIT for promoting to steady employment.

Nussler was very active at Hanover, and had his deal boxes;
but hardly got them filled according to hope. However, in some
eighteen months he had actually worked out, in difficult
instalments, about 13,000 pounds, and dug the matter to the
bottom. He came home with his last instalment, not disapproved of,
to Berlin (May, 1732); six years after the poor Duchess's death,
so the Ahlden ALLODIA too had their end.



Chapter VII.

A MARRIAGE: NOT THE DOUBLE-MARRIAGE: CROWN-PRINCE DEEP IN TROUBLE.

While the Hanover Imminency was but beginning, and horrid crisis
of War or Duel--was yet in nobody's thoughts, the Anspach Wedding
[30th May, 1729] had gone on at Berlin. To Friedrich Wilhelm's
satisfaction; not to his Queen's, the match being but a poor one.
The bride was Frederika Louisa, not the eldest of their Daughters,
but the next-eldest: younger than Wilhelmina, and still hardly
fifteen; the first married of the Family. Very young she: and gets
a very young Margraf,--who has been, and still is a minor;
under his Mother's guardianship till now: not rich, and who has
not had a good chance to be wise. The Mother--an excellent
magnanimous Princess, still young and beautiful, but laboring
silently under some mortal disease--has done her best to manage
for him these last four or five years; [Pollnitz, <italic> Memoirs
and Letters <end italic> (English Translation, London, I745),
i. 200-204. There are "MEMOIRS of Pollnitz," then "MEMOIRS AND
LETTERS," besides the "MEMOIRS of Brandenburg" (posthumous, which
we often cite); all by this poor man. Only the last has any
Historical value, and that not much. The first two are only worth
consulting, cautiously, as loose contemporary babble,--written for
the Dutch Booksellers, one can perceive.] and, as I gather, is
impatient to see him settled, that she may retire and die.

Friday forenoon, 19th May, 1729, the young Margraf arrived in
person at Berlin,--just seventeen gone Saturday last, poor young
soul, and very foolish. Sublime royal carriage met him at the
Prussian frontier; and this day, what is more interesting, our
"Crown-Prince rides out to meet him; mounts into the royal
carriage beside him;" and the two young fools drive, in such a
cavalcade of hoofs and wheels,--talking we know not what,--into
Potsdam; met by his Majesty and all the honors. What illustrious
gala there then was in Potsdam and the Court world, read,--with
tedium, unless you are in the tailor line,--described with minute
distinctness by the admiring Fassmann. [pp.396-401.] There are
Generals, high Ladies, sons of Bellona and Latona; there are
dinners, there are hautboys,--"two-and-thirty blackamoors," in
flaming uniforms, capable of cymballing and hautboying "up the
grand staircase, and round your table, and down again," in a
frightfully effective manner, while you dine. Madame Kamecke is to
go as Oberhofmeisterinn to Anspach; and all the lackeys destined
thither are in their new liveries, blue turned up with red velvet.
Which is delightful to see. Review of the Giant grenadiers cannot
fail; conspicuous on parade with them our Crown-Prince as
Lieutenant-Colonel: "the beauty of this Corps as well as the
perfection of their EXERCITIA,"--ah yes, we know it, my dim old
friend. The Marriage itself followed, at Berlin, after many
exercitia, snipe-shootings, feastings, hautboyings; on the 30th
of the month; with torch-dance and the other customary trimmings;
"Bride's garter cut in snips" for dreaming upon "by his Royal
Majesty himself." The LUSTBARKEITEN, the stupendous public
entertainments having ended, there is weeping and embracing (MORE
HUMANO); and the happy couple, so-called happy, retire to Anspach
with their destinies and effects.

A foolish young fellow, this new Brother-in-law, testifies
Wilhelmina in many places. Finances in disorder; Mother's wise
management, ceasing too soon, has only partially availed.
King "has lent some hundreds of thousands of crowns to Anspach
[says Friedrich at a later period], which there is no chance of
ever being repaid. All is in disorder there, in the finance way;
if the Margraf gets his hunting and his heroning, he laughs at all
the rest; and his people pluck him bare at every hand."
[Schulenburg's Letter (in Forster, iii. 72).] Nor do the married
couple agree to perfection;--far from it: "hate one another like
cat and dog (like the fire, COMME LE FEU)," says Friedrich:
[Correspondence (more than once).] "his Majesty may see what comes
of ill-assorted marriages!"--In fact, the union proved none of the
most harmonious; subject to squalls always;--but to squalls only;
no open tempest, far less any shipwreck: the marriage held
together till death, the Husband's death, nearly thirty years
after, divided it. There was then left one Son; the same who at
length inherited Baireuth too,--inherited Lady Craven,--and died
in Bubb Doddington's Mansion, as we often teach our readers.

Last year, the Third Daughter was engaged to the Heir-Apparent of
Brunswick; will be married, when of age. Wilhelmina, flower of
them all, still hangs on the bush, "asked," or supposed to be
"asked by four Kings," but not attained by any of them; and one
knows not what will be her lot. She is now risen out of the
sickness she has had,--not small-pox at all, as malicious English
rumor gave it in England;--and "looks prettier than ever,"
writes Dubourgay.

Here is a marriage, then; first in the Family;--but not the
Double-Marriage, by a long way! The late Hanover Tornado, sudden
Waterspout as we called it, has quenched that Negotiation; and one
knows not in what form it will resuscitate itself. The royal mind,
both at Berlin and St. James's, is in a very uncertain state after
such a phenomenon.

Friedrich Wilhelm's favor for the Crown-Prince, marching home so
gallantly with his Potsdam Giants, did not last long. A few weeks
later in the Autumn we have again ominous notices from Dubourgay.
And here, otherwise obtained, is a glimpse into the interior of
the Berlin Schloss; momentary perfect clearness, as by a flash of
lightning, on the state of matters there; which will be
illuminative to the reader.


  CROWN-PRINCE'S DOMESTICITIES SEEN IN A FLASH OF LIGHTNING.

This is another of those tragi-comic scenes, tragic enough in
effect, between Father and Son; Son now about eighteen,--fit to be
getting through Oxford, had he been an English gentleman of
private station. It comes from the irrefragable Nicolai; who dates
it about this time, uncertain as to month or day.

Fritz's love of music, especially of fluting, is already known to
us. Now a certain Quantz was one of his principal instructors in
that art, and indeed gave him the last finish of perfection in it.
Quantz, famed Saxon music-master and composer, Leader of the
Court-Band in Saxony, king of flute-players in his day,--
(a village-farrier's son from the Gottingen region, and himself
destined to shoe horses, had not imperative Nature prevailed over
hindrances);--Quantz, ever from Fritz's sixteenth year, was wont
to come occasionally, express from Dresden, for a week or two, and
give the young man lessons on the flute. The young man's Mother,
good Queen Feekin, had begged this favor for him from the Saxon
Sovereignties; and pleaded hard for it at home, or at worst kept
it secret there. It was one of the many good maternities,
clandestine and public, which she was always ready to achieve for
him where possible;--as he also knew full well in his young
grateful heart, and never forgot, however old he grew! Illustrious
Quantz, we say, gives Fritz lessons on the flute; and here is a
scene they underwent;--they and a certain brisk young soldier
fellow, Lieutenant von Katte, who was there too; of whom the
reader will tragically hear more in time.

On such occasions Fritz was wont to pull off the tight Prussian
coat or COATIE, and clap himself into flowing brocade of the due
roominess and splendor,--bright scarlet dressing-gown, done in
gold, with tags and sashes complete;--and so, in a temporary
manner, feel that there was such a thing as a gentleman's suitable
apparel. He would take his music-lessons, follow his clandestine
studies, in that favorable dress:--thus Buffon, we hear, was wont
to shave, and put on clean linen, before he sat down to write,
finding it more comfortable so. Though, again, there have been
others who could write in considerable disorder; not to say
litter, and palpable imperfection of equipment: Samuel Johnson,
for instance, did some really grand writing in a room where there
was but one chair, and that one incapable of standing unless you
sat on it, having only three feet. A man is to fit himself to what
is round him: but surely a Crown-Prince may be indulged in a
little brocade in his leisure moments!--

Fritz and Quantz sat doing music, an unlawful thing, in this
pleasant, but also unlawful costume; when Lieutenant Katte, who
was on watch in the outer room, rushes in, distraction in his
aspect: Majesty just here! Quick, double quick! Katte snatches the
music-books and flutes, snatches Quantz; hurries with him and them
into some wall-press, or closet for firewood, and stands quaking
there. Our poor Prince has flung aside his brocade, got on his
military coatie; and would fain seem busy with important or
indifferent routine matters. But, alas, he cannot undo the French
hairdressing; cannot change the graceful French bag into the
strict Prussian queue in a moment. The French bag betrays him;
kindles the paternal vigilance,--alas, the paternal wrath, into a
tornado pitch. For his vigilant suspecting Majesty searches about;
finds the brocade article behind a screen; crams it, with loud
indignation, into the fire; finds all the illicit French Books;
confiscates them on the spot, confiscates all manner of contraband
goods:--and there was mere sulphurous whirlwind in those serene
spaces for about an hour! If his Majesty had looked into the
wood-closet? His Majesty, by Heaven's express mercy, omitted that.
Haude the Bookseller was sent for; ordered to carry off that
poisonous French cabinet-library in mass; sell every Book of it,
to an undiscerning public, at what price it will fetch.
Which latter part of his order, Haude, in deep secrecy, ventured
to disobey, being influenced thereto. Haude, in deep secrecy, kept
the cabinet-library secure; and "lent" the Prince book after book
from it, as his Royal Highness required them.

Friedrich, it is whispered in Tobacco-Parliament, has been known,
in his irreverent impatience, to call the Grenadier uniform his
"shroud (STERBEKITTEL, or death-clothes);" so imprisoning to the
young mind and body! Paternal Majesty has heard this blasphemous
rumor; hence doubtless, in part, his fury against the wider
brocade garment.

It was Quantz himself that reported this explosion to authentic
Nicolai, many years afterwards; confessing that he trembled, every
joint of him, in the wood-closet, during that hour of hurricane;
and the rather as he had on "a red dress-coat," whioh color,
foremost of the flaring colors, he knew to be his Majesty's
aversion, on a man's back. [Nicolai, <italic> Anekdoten <end
italic> (Berlin, 1790), ii. 148.] Of incomparable Quantz, and his
heart-thrilling adagios, we hope to hear transiently again, under
joyfuler circumstances. Of Lieutenant von Katte,--a short stout
young fellow, with black eyebrows, pock-marked face, and rather
dissolute manners,--we shall not fail to hear.



Chapter VIII.

CROWN-PRINCE GETTING BEYOND HIS DEPTH IN TROUBLE.

It is not certain that the late Imminency of Duel had much to do
with such explosions. The Hanover Imminency, which we likened to a
tropical waterspout, or sudden thunderous blotting-out of the sky
to the astonished Gazetteers, seems rather to have passed away as
waterspouts do,--leaving the earth and air, if anything, a little
REFRESHED by such crisis. Leaving, that is to say, the two
Majesties a little less disposed for open quarrel, or rash
utterance of their ill humor in time coming. But, in the mean
while, all mutual interests are in a painful state of suspended
animation: in Berlin there is a privately rebellious Spouse and
Household, there is a Tobacco-Parliament withal;--and the royal
mind, sensitive, imaginative as a poet's, as a woman's, and liable
to transports as of a Norse Baresark, is of uncertain movement.
Such a load of intricacies and exaggerated anxieties hanging on
it, the royal mind goes like the most confused smoke-jack, sure
only to HAVE revolutions; and we know how, afar from Soissons, and
at home in Tobacco-Parliament, the machine is influenced!
Enough, the explosive procedures continue, and are on the
increasing hand.

Majesty's hunting at Wusterhausen was hardly done, when that
alarming Treaty of Seville came to light (9th November, 1729),
France and England ranked by the side of Spain, disposing of
Princes and Apanages at their will, and a Kaiser left sitting
solitary,--which awakens the domestic whirlwinds at Berlin, among
other results. "CANAILLE ANGLAISE, English Doggery!" and similar
fine epithets, addressed to Wilhelmina and the Crown-Prince, fly
about; not to speak of occasional crockery and other missiles.
Friedrich Wilhelm has forbidden these two his presence altogether,
except at dinner: Out of my sight, ye Canaille Anglaise;
darken not the sunlight for me at all!

This is in the Wusterhausen time,--Hanover Imminency only two
months gone. And Mamma sends for us to have private dialogues in
her Apartment there, with spies out in every direction to make
signal of Majesty's return from his hunt,--who, however, surprises
as on one occasion, so that we have to squat for hours, and almost
get suffocated. [Wilhelmina, i. 172.] Whereupon the Crown-Prince,
who will be eighteen in a couple of months, and feels the
indignity of such things, begs of Mamma to be excused in future.
He has much to suffer from his Father again, writes Dubourgay in
the end of November: "it is difficult to conceive the vile
stratagems that are made use of to provoke the Father against the
Son." [Dubourgay, 28th November, 1729.] Or again, take this,
as perhaps marking an epoch in the business, a fortnight
farther on:--

DECEMBER 10th 1729. "His Prussian Majesty cannot bear the sight of
either the Prince or Princess Royal: The other day, he asked the
Prince: 'Kalkstein makes you English; does not he?'" Kalkstein,
your old Tutor, Borck, Knyphausen, Finkenstein, they are all of
that vile clique! "To which the Prince answered, 'I respect the
English because I know the people there love me;' upon which the
King seized him by the collar, struck him fiercely with his cane,"
in fact rained showers of blows upon him; "and it was only by
superior strength," thinks Dubourgay, "that the poor Prince
escaped worse. There is a general apprehension of something
tragical taking place before long."

Truly the situation is so violent, it cannot last. And in effect a
wild thought, not quite new, ripens to a resolution in the
Crown-Prince under such pressures: In reference to which, as we
grope and guess, here is a Billet to Mamma, which Wilhelmina has
preserved. Wilhelmina omits all trace of date, as usual; but
Dubourgay, in the above Excerpt, probably supplies that defect:--


FRIEDRICH TO HIS MOTHER (Potsdam, December, 1729).

"I am in the uttermost despair. What I had always apprehended has
at last come on me. The King has entirely forgotten that I am his
Son. This morning I came into his room as usual; at the first
sight of me," or at the first passage of Kalkstein-dialogue with
me, "he sprang forward, seized me by the collar, and struck me a
shower of cruel blows with his rattan. I tried in vain to screen
myself, he was in so terrible a rage, almost out of himself;
it was only weariness," not my superior strength, "that made him
give up."

"I am driven to extremity. I have too much honor to endure such
treatment; and I am resolved to put an end to it in one way or
another." [Wilhelmina, i. 175.]

Is not this itself sufficiently tragical? Not the first stroke he
had got, we can surmise; but the first torrent of strokes, and
open beating like a slave;--which to a proud young man and Prince,
at such age, is indeed INtolerable. Wilhelmina knows too well what
he meaus by "ending it in one way or another;" but strives to
reassure Mamma as to its meaning "flight," or the like desperate
resolution. "Mere violence of the moment," argues Wilhelmina;
terribly aware that it is deeper-rooted than that.

Flight is not a new idea to the Crown-Prince; in a negative form
we have seen it present in the minds of by-standers:
"a Crown-Prince determined NOT to fly," whispered they. [Dubourgay
(9th August, 1729), supra, p. 129.] Some weeks ago, Wilhelmina
writes: "The King's bad treatments began again on his
reappearance" at Potsdam after the Hunting; "he never saw my
Brother without threatening him with his cane. My Brother told me
day after day, He would endure everything from the King, only not
blows; and that if it ever came to such extremity, he would be
prepared to deliver himself by running off." And here, it would
seem, the extremity has actually come.

Wilhelmina, pitying her poor Brother, but condemning him on many
points, continues: [i. 173, 174.] "Lieutenant Keith," that wild
companion of his, "had been gone some time, stationed in Wesel
with his regiment." Which fact let us also keep in mind.
"Keith's departure had been a great joy to me; in the hope my
Brother would now lead a more regular life: but it proved quite
otherwise. A second favorite, and a much more dangerous, succeeded
Keith. This was a young man of the name of Katte,
Captain-Lieutenant in the regiment GENS-D'ARMES. He was highly
connected in the Army; his Mother had been a daughter of
Feldmarschall Graf von Wartensleben,"--a highest dignitary of the
last generation. Katte's Father, now a General of distinction,
rose also to be Feldmarschall; Cousins too, sons of a
Kammer-President von Katte at Magdeburg, rose to Army rank in time
coming; but not this poor Katte,--whom let the reader note!

"General Katte his Father," continues Wilhelmina, "had sent him to
the Universities, and afterwards to travel, desiring he should be
a Lawyer. But as there was no favor to expect out of the Army, the
young man found himself at last placed there, contrary to his
expectation. He continued to apply himself to studies; he had wit,
book-culture, acquaintance with the world; the good company which
he continued to frequent had given him polite manners, to a degree
then rare in Berlin. His physiognomy was rather disagreeable than
otherwise. A pair of thick black eyebrows almost covered the eyes
of him; his look had in it something ominous, presage of the fate
he met with: a tawny skin, torn by small-pox, increased his
ugliness. He affected the freethinker, and carried libertinism to
excess; a great deal of ambition and headlong rashness accompanied
this vice." A dangerous adviser here in the Berlin element, with
lightnings going! "Such a favorite was not the man to bring back
my Brother from his follies. This I learned at our [Mamma's and
my] return to Berlin," from the Wusterhausen and the Potsdam
tribulations;--and think of it, not without terror, now that the
extremity seems coming or come.



Chapter IX.

DOUBLE-MARRIAGE SHALL BE OR SHALL NOT BE.

For one thing, Friedrich Wilhelm, weary of all this English pother
and futility, will end the Double-Marriage speculation; Wilhelmina
shall be disposed of, and so an end. Friedrich Wilhelm, once the
hunting was over at Wusterhausen, ran across, southward,--to
"Lubnow," Wilhelmina calls it,--to Lubben in the Nether Lausitz,
[25th October, 1729 (Fassmann, p. 404).] a short day's drive;
there to meet incognito the jovial Polish Majesty, on his route
towards Dresden; to see a review or so; and have a little talk
with the ever-cheerful Man of Sin. Grumkow and Seckendorf, of
course these accompany; Majesty's shadow is not surer.

Review was held at Lubben, Weissenfels Commander-in-chief taking
charge; dinner also, a dinner or two, with much talk and drink;--
and there it was settled, Wilhelmina has since known, that
Weissenfels, Royal Highness in the Abstract, was to be her
Husband, after all. Weissenfels will do; either Weissenfels or
else the Margraf of Schwedt, thinks Friedrich Wilhelm; somebody
shall marry the baggage out of hand, and let us have done with
that. Grumkow, as we know, was very anxious for it; calculating
thereby to out the ground from under the Old Dessauer, and make
this Weissenfels Generalissimo of Prussia; a patriotic thought.
Polish Majesty lent hand, always willing to oblige.

Friedrich Wilhelm, on his return homewards, went round by Dahme
for a night:--not "Dam," O Princess, there is no such town or
schloss! Round by Dahme, a little town and patch of territory, in
the Saxon Countries, which was Weissenfels's Apanage;--"where
plenty of Tokay" cheered the royal heart; and, in such mood, it
seemed as if one's Daughter might do very well in this extremely
limited position. And Weissenfels, though with dark misgivings as
to Queen Sophie, was but too happy to consent: the foolish
creature; a little given to liquor too! Friedrich Wilhelm, with
this fine project in his head, drove home to Potsdam;--and there
laid about him, on the poor Crown-Prince, in the way we have seen;
terrifying Queen and Princess, who are at Berlin till Christmas
and the Carnival be over. Friedrich Wilhelm means to see the
Polish Majesty again before long,--probably so soon as this of
Weissenfels is fairly got through the Female Parliament, where it
is like there will be difficulties.

Christmas came to Berlin, and the King with it; who did the
gayeties for a week or two, and spoke nothing about business to
his Female Parliament. Dubourgay saw him, at Parade, on New-Year's
morning; whither all manner of Foreign Dignitaries had come to pay
their respects: "Well," cried the  King to Dubourgay, "we shall
have a War, then,"--universa1 deadly tug at those Italian
Apanages, for and against an insulted Kaiser,--"War; and then all
that is crooked will be pulled straight!" So spake Friedrich
Wilhelm on the New-Year's morning; War in Italy, universal spasm
of wrestle there, being now the expectation of foolish mankind:
Crooked will be pulled straight, thinks Friedrich Wilhelm;
and perhaps certain high Majesties, deaf to the voice of
Should-not, will understand that of Can-not, Excellenz!--
Crooked will become straight? "Indeed if so, your Majesty,
the sooner the better!" I ventured to answer. [Dubourgay,
8th January, 1730.]

New Year's day is not well in, and the ceremonial wishes over,
when Friedrich Wilhelm, his mind full of serious domestic and
foreign matter, withdraws to Potsdam again; and therefrom begins
fulminating in a terrible manner on his womankind at Berlin, what
we called his Female Parliament,--too much given to opposition
courses at present. Intends to have his measures passed there, in
defiance of opposition; straightway; and an end put to this
inexpressible Double-Marriage higgle-haggle. Speed to him! we will
say.--Three high Crises occur, three or even four, which can now
without much detail be made intelligible to the patient reader:
on the back of which we look for some catastrophe and finis to the
Business;--any catastrophe that will prove a finis, how welcome
will it be!


WILHELMINA TO BE MARRIED OUT OF HAND. CRISIS FIRST:
ENGLAND SHALL SAY YES OR SAY NO.

Still early in January, a few days after his Majesty's return to
Potsdam, three high Official gentlemen, Count Fink van
Finkenstein, old Tutor to the Prince, Grumkow and General Borck
announce themselves one morning; "Have a pressing message from the
King to her Majesty." [Wilhelmina, i. 180.]  Queen is astonished;
expecting anything sooner.--"This regards me, I have a dreading!"
shuddered Wilhelmina to Mamma. "No matter," said the Queen,
shrugging her shoulders; "one must have firmness; and that is not
what I shall want;"--and her Majesty went into the
Audience-chamber, leaving Wilhelmina in such tremors.

Finkenstein, a friendly man, as Borck too is, explains to her
Majesty, "That they three have received each a Letter overnight,--
Letter from the King, enjoining in the FIRST place 'silence under
pain of death;' in the SECOND place, apprising them that he, the
King, will no longer endure her Majesty's disobedience in regard
to the marriage of his Daughter, but will banish Daughter and
Mother 'to Oranienburg,' quasi-divorce, and outer darkness, unless
there be compliance with his sovereign will; THIRDLY, that they
are accordingly to go, all three, to her Majesty, to deliver the
enclosed Royal Autograph [which Finkenstein presents], testifying
what said sovereign will is, and on the above terms expect her
Majesty's reply;"--as they have now sorrowfully done, Finkenstein
and Borck with real sorrow; Grumkow with the reverse of real.

Sovereign will is to the effect: "Write to England one other time,
Will you at once marry, or not at once; Yea or No? Answer can be
here within a fortnight; three weeks, even in case of bad winds.
If the answer be not Yea at once; then you, Madam, you at once
choose Weissenfels or Schwedt, one or the other,--under what
penalties you know; Oranienburg and worse!"

Here is a crisis. But her Majesty did not want firmness. "Write to
England? Yes, willingly. But as to Weissenfels and Schwedt,
whatever answer come from England,--Impossible!" steadily answers
her Majesty. There was much discourse, suasive, argumentative;
Grumkow "quoting Scripture on her Majesty, as the Devil can on
occasion," says Wilhelmina. Express Scriptures, <italic> Wives, be
obedient to your husbands, <end italic> and the like texts:
but her Majesty, on the Scripture side too, gave him as good as he
brought. "Did not Bethuel the son of Milcah, [Genesis xxiv.
14-58.] when Abraham's servant asked his daughter in marriage for
young Isaac, answer, <italic> We will call the damsel and inquire
of her mouth. And they called Rebecca, and said unto her, Wilt
thou go with this man? And she said, I will go." <end italic>
Scripture for Scripture, Herr von Grumkow! "Wives must obey their
husbands; surely yes. But the husbands are to command things just
and reasonable. The King's procedure is not accordant with that
law. He is for doing violence to my Daughter's inclination, and
rendering her unhappy for the rest of her days;--will give her a
brutal debauchee," fat Weissenfels, so describable in strong
language; "a younger brother, who is nothing but the King of
Poland's Officer; landless, and without means to live according to
his rank. Or can it be the State that will profit from such a
marriage? If they have a Household, the King will have to support
it.--Write to England; Yes; but whatever the answer of England,
Weissenfels never! A thousand times sooner see my child in her
grave than hopelessly miserable!" Here a qualm overtook her
Majesty; for in fact she is in an interesting state, third month
of her time: "I am not well; You should spare me, Gentlemen, in
the state I am in.--I do not accuse the King," concluded she:
"I know," hurling a glance at Grumkow, "to whom I owe all this;"--
and withdrew to her interior privacies; reading there with
Wilhelmina "the King's cruel Letter," and weeping largely, though
firm to the death. [Wilhelmina, i. 179-182. Dubourgay has
nothing,--probably had heard nothing, there being "silence under
pain of death" for the moment.]

What to do in such a crisis? Assemble the Female Parliament, for
one thing: good Madam Finkenstein (old Tutor's wife), good Mamsell
Bulow, Mamsell Sonsfeld (Wilhelmina's Governess), and other
faithful women:--well if we can keep away traitresses, female
spies that are prowling about; especially one "Ramen," a Queen's
soubrette, who gets trusted with everything, and betrays
everything; upon whom Wilhelmina is often eloquent. Never was such
a traitress; took Dubourgay's bribe, which the Queen had advised;
and, all the same, betrays everything,--bribe included. And the
Queen, so bewitched, can keep nothing from her. Female Parliament
must, take precautions about the Ramen!--For the rest, Female
Parliament advises two things: 1. Pressing Letter to England;
that of course, written with the eloquence of despair: and then
2. That in ease of utter extremity, her Majesty "pretend to fall
ill." That is Crisis First; and that is their expedient upon it.

Letter goes to England, therefore; setting forth the extremity of
strait, and pinch: "Now or never, O my Sister Caroline!" Many such
have gone, first and last; but this is the strongest of all.
Nay the Crown-Prince too shall write to his Aunt of England:
you, Wilhelmina, draw out, a fit brief Letter for him: send it to
Potsdam, he will copy it there! [Wilhelmina, i. 183.] So orders
the Mother: Wilhelmina does it, with a terrified heart;
Crown-Prince copies without scruple: "I have already given your
Majesty my word of honor never to wed any one but the Princess
Amelia your Daughter; I here reiterate that Promise, in case your
Majesty will consent to my Sister's Marriage,"--should that alone
prove possible in the present intricacies. "We are all reduced to
such a state that"--Wilhelmina gives the Letter in full; but as it
is professedly of her own composition, a loose vague piece, the
very date of which you have to grope out for yourself, it cannot
even count among the several Letters written by the Crown-Prince,
both before and after it, to the same effect, which are now
probably all of them lost, [TRACE of one, Copy of ANSWER from
Queen Caroline to what seems to have been one, Answer rather of
dissuasive tenor, is in State-Paper Office: <italic> Prussian
Despatches, <end italic> vol. xl,--dateless; probably some months
later in 1780.] without regret to anybody; and we will not reckon
it worth transcribing farther. Such Missive, such two Missives
(not now found in any archive) speed to England by express;
may the winds be favorable. Her Majesty waits anxious at Berlin;
ready to take refuge in a bed of sickness, should bad come
to worse.


DUBOURGAY STRIKES A LIGHT FOR THE ENGLISH COURT.

In England, in the mean while, they have received a curious little
piece of secret information. One Reichenbach, Prussian Envoy at
London--Dubourgay has long marvelled at the man and at the news he
sends to Berlin. Here, of date 17th January, 1730, is a Letter on
that subject from Dubourgay, official but private as yet, for
"George Tilson, Esq.:"--Tilson is Under-Secretary in the Foreign
Office, whose name often turns up on such occasions in the
DUBOURGAY, the ROBINSON and other extinct Paper-heaps of that
time. Dubourgay dates doubly, by old and new style; in general we
print by the new only, unless the contrary be specified.


"TO GEORGE TILSON, ESQ. (Private.)

"BERLIN, 6th Jan. 1729 (by new style, 17th Jan. 1730).

"SIR,--I believe you may remember that we have for a long time
suspected that most of Reichenbach's Despatches were dictated by
some people here. About two days ago a Paper fell into my hands,"
realized quietly for a consideration, "containing an Account of
money charged to the 'Brothers Jourdan and Lautiers,' Merchants
here, by their Correspondent in London, for sending Letters from,"
properly in, or through, "your City to Reichenbach.

"Jourdan and Lautiers's London Correspondents are Mr. Thomas
Greenhill in Little Bell Alley and Mr. John Motteux in St. Mary
Axe. Mr. Guerin my Agent knows them very well; having paid them
several little bills on my account:"--Better ask Mr. Guerin.
"I know not through the hands of which of those Merchants the
above-mentioned Letters have passed; but you have ways enough to
find it out, if you think it worth while. I make no manner of
doubt but Grumkow and his party make use of this conveyance to
(SIC) their instructions to Reichenbach. In the Account which I
have seen, 'eighteen-pence' is charged for carrying each Letter to
Reichenbach: the charge in general is for 'Thirty-two Letters;'
and refers to a former Account." So that they must have been
long at it.

"I am, with the greatest truth,

"DUBOURGAY."


Here is a trail which Tilson will have no difficulty in running
down. I forget whether it was in Bell Alley or St. Mary Axe that
the nest was found; but found it soon was, and the due springes
were set; and game came steadily dropping in,--Letters to and
Letters from,--which, when once his Britannic Majesty had, with
reluctance, given warrant to open and decipher them, threw light
on Prussian Affairs, and yielded fine sport and speculation in the
Britannic Majesty's Apartment on an evening.

This is no other than the celebrated "Cipher Correspondence
between Grumkow and Reichenbach;" Grumkow covertly instructing his
slave Reichenbach what the London news shall be: Reichenbach
answering him, To hear is to obey! Correspondence much noised of
in the modern Prussian Books; and which was, no doubt, very
wonderful to Tilson and Company;--capable of being turned to uses,
they thought. The reader shall see specimens by and by; and he
will find it unimportant enough, and unspeakably stupid to him.
It does show Grumkow as the extreme of subtle fowlers, and how the
dirty-fingered Seckendorf and he cooked their birdlime: but to us
that is not new, though at St. James's it was. Perhaps uses may
lie in it there? At all events, it is a pretty topic in Queen
Caroline's apartment on an evening; and the little Majesty and
she, with various laughters and reflections, can discern, a
little, How a poor King of Prussia is befooled by his servants,
and in what way a fierce Bear is led about by the nose, and dances
to Grumkow's piping. Poor soul, much of his late raging and
growling, perhaps it was only Grumkow's and not his! Does not hate
us, he, perhaps; but only Grumkow through him? This doleful
enchantment, and that the Royal Wild Bear dances only to tunes,
ought to be held in mind, when we want anything with him.--
Those, amid the teheeings, are reflections that cannot escape
Queen Caroline and her little George, while the Prussian Express,
unknown to them, is on the road.


WILHELMINA TO BE MARRIED OUT OF HAND. CRISIS SECOND:
ENGLAND SHALL HAVE SAID NO.

The Prussian Express, Queen Sophie's Courier to England, made his
best speed: but he depends on the winds for even arriving there;
and then he depends on the chances for an answer there;
an uncertain Courier as to time: and it was not in the power of
speed to keep pace with Friedrich Wilhelm's impatience. "No answer
yet?" growls Friedrich Wilhelm before a fortnight is gone.
"No answer?"--and January has not ended till a new Deputation of
the same Three Gentlemen, Finkenstein, Borck, Grumkow, again waits
on the Queen, for whom there is now this other message.
"Wednesday, 25th January, 1730," so Dubourgay dates it;
so likewise Wilhelmina, right for once: "a day I shall never
forget," adds she.

Finkenstein and Borck, merciful persons, and always of the English
party, were again profoundly sorry. Borck has a blaze of temper in
him withal; we hear he apprised Grumkow, at one point of the
dialogue, that he, Grumkow, was a "scoundrel," so Dubourgay calls
it,--which was one undeniable truth offered there that day.
But what can anything profit? The Message is: "Whatever the answer
now be from England, I will have nothing to do with it.
Negative, procrastinative, affirmative, to me it shall be zero.
You, Madam, have to choose, for Wilhelmina, between Weissenfels
and Schwedt; otherwise I myself will choose: and upon you and her
will alight Oranienburg, outer darkness, and just penalties of
mutiny against the Authority set over you by God and men.
Weissenfels or Schwedt: choose straightway." This is the King's
message by these Three.

"You can inform the King," replied her Majesty, [Wilhelmina,
i. 188.] "that he will never make me consent to render my Daughter
miserable; and that, so long as a breath of life (UN SOUFFLE DE
VIE) remains in me, I will not permit her to take either the one
or the other of those persons." Is that enough? "For you, Sir,"
added her Majesty, turning to Grumkow, "for you, Sir, who are the
author of my misfortunes, may my curse fall upon you and your
house! You have this day killed me. But I doubt not, Heaven will
hear my prayer, and avenge these wrongs." [Dubourgay, 28th
January, 1730; Wilhelmina, i. 188 (who suppresses the maledictory
part).]--And herewith to a bed of sickness, as the one
refuge left!

Her Majesty does now, in fact, take to bed at Berlin; "fallen very
ill," it would appear; which gives some pause to Friedrich Wilhelm
till he ascertain. "Poorly, for certain," report the Doctors, even
Friedrich Wilhelm's Doctor. The humane Doctors have silently given
one another the hint; for Berlin is one tempest of whispers about
her Majesty's domestic sorrows, "Poorly, for interesting reasons:
--perhaps be worse before she is better, your Majesty!"--"Hmph!"
thinks Friedrich Wilhelm out at Potsdam. And then the treacherous
Ramen reports that it is all shamming; and his Majesty, a Bear,
though a loving one, is driven into wrath again; and so wavers
from side to side.

It is certain the Queen held, faster or looser, by her bed of
sickness, as a main refuge in these emergencies: the last shift
of oppressed womankind;--sanctioned by Female Parliament, in this
instance. "Has had a miscarriage!" writes Dubourgay, from Berlin
gossip, at the beginning of the business. Nay at one time she
became really ill, to a dangerous length; and his Majesty did not
at first believe it; and then was like to break his heart, poor
Bear; aud pardoned Wilhelmina and even Fritz, at the Mother's
request,--till symptoms mended again. [Wilhelmina, i. 207.]
JARNI-BLEU, Herr Seckendorf, "Grumkow serves us honorably (DIENET
EHRLICH)"--does not he!--Ambiguous bed of sickness, a refuge in
time of trouble, did not quite terminate till May next, when her
Majesty's time came; a fine young Prince the result; [23d May,
1730, August Ferdinand; her last child.] and this mode of refuge
in trouble ceased to be necessary.


WILHELMINA TO BE MARRIED OUT OF HAND. CRISIS THIRD:
MAJESTY HIMSELF WILL CHOOSE, THEN.

Directly on the back of that peremptory act of disobedience by the
womankind on Wednesday last, Friedrich Wilhelm came to Berlin
himself. He stormfully reproached his Queen, regardless of the
sick-bed; intimated the infallible certainty, That Wilhelmina
nevertheless would wed without delay, and that either Weissenfels
or Schwedt would be the man. And this said, he straightway walked
out to put the same in execution.

Walked, namely, to the Mother Margravine of Schwedt, the lady in
high colors, Old Dessauer's Sister; and proposed to her that
Wilhelmina should marry her Son.--"The supreme wish of my life,
your Majesty," replied she of the high colors: "But, against the
Princess's own will, how can I accept such happiness? Alas, your
Majesty, I never can!"--and flatly refused his Majesty on those
terms: a thing Wilhelmina will ever gratefully remember of her.
[Wilhelmina, i. 197.]

So that the King is now reduced to Weissenfels; and returns still
more indignant to her Majesty's apartment. Weissenfels, however,
it shall be; and frightful rumors go that he is written to, that
he is privately coming, and that there will be no remedy.
[Wilhelmina, i. 197.] Wilhelmina, formerly almost too florid, is
gone to a shadow; "her waist hardly half an ell;" worn down by
these agitations. The Prince and she, if the King see either of
them,--it is safer to run, or squat behind screens.


HOW FRIEDRICH PRINCE OF BAIREUTH CAME TO BE THE MAN, AFTER ALL.

In this high wind of extremity, the King now on the spot and in
such temper, Borck privately advises, "That her Majesty bend a
little,--pretend to give up the English connection, and propose a
third party, to get rid of Weissenfels."--"What third party,
then?"--"Well, there is young Brandenburg-Culmbach, for example,
Heir-Apparent of Baireuth; Friedrich, a handsome enough young
Prince, just coming home from the Grand Tour, we hear; will have a
fine Territory when his Father dies: age is suitable; old kinship
with the House, all money-quarrels settled eight or ten years ago:
why not him?"--"Excellent!" said her Majesty; and does suggest him
to the King, in the next Schwedt-Weissenfels onslaught.
Friedrich Wilhelm grumbles an assent, "Well, then:--but I will be
passive, observe; not a GROSCHEN of Dowry, for one thing!"--

And this is the first appearance of the young Margraf Friedrich,
Heir-Apparent of Baireuth; who comes in as a hypothetic figure, at
this late stage;--and will carry off the fair prize, as is well
known. Still only doing the Grand Tour; little dreaming of the
high fortune about to drop into his mouth. So many wooers, "four
Kings" among them, suing in vain; him, without suing, the Fates
appoint to be the man.

Not a bad young fellow at all, though no King. Wilhelmina, we
shall find, takes charmingly to him, like a good female soul;
regretless of the Four Kings;--finds her own safe little island
there the prettiest in the world, after such perils of drowning
in stormy seas.--Of his Brandenburg genealogy, degree of
cousinship to Queen Caroline of England, and to the lately wedded
young gentleman of Anspach Queen Caroline's Nephew, we shall say
nothing farther, having already spoken of it, and even drawn an
abstruse Diagram of it, [Antea, vol. v. p. 309c.] sufficient for
the most genealogical reader. But in regard to that of the
peremptory "Not a GROSCHEN of Dowry" from Friedrich Wilhelm (which
was but a bark, after all, and proved the reverse of a bite, from
his Majesty), there may a word of explanation be permissible.

The Ancestor of this Baireuth Prince Friedrich,--as readers knew
once, but doubtless have forgotten again,--was a Younger Son;
and for six generations so it stood: not till the Father of this
Friedrich was of good age, and only within these few years, did
the Elder branch die out, and the Younger, in the person of said
Father, succeed to Baireuth. Friedrich's Grandfather, as all these
progenitors had done, lived poorly, like Cadets, on apanages
and makeshifts.

So that the Young Prince's Father, George Friedrich, present
incumbent, as we may call him, of Baireuth, found himself--with a
couple of Brothers he has, whom also we may transiently see by and
by--in very straitened circumstances in their young years.
THEIR Father, son of younger sons as we saw, was himself poor, and
he had Fourteen of them as family. Now, in old King Friedrich I.'s
time, it became apparent, as the then reigning Margraf of
Baireuth's children all died soon after birth, that one of these
necessitous Fourteen was likely to succeed in Baireuth, if they
could hold out. Old King Friedrich thereupon said, "You have
chances of succession; true enough,--but nobody knows what will
become of that. Sell your chance to me, who am ultimate Heir of
all: I will give you a round sum,--the little 'Domain of
Weverlingen' in the Halberstadt Country, and say 'Half a Million
Thalers;' there you can live comfortably, and support your
Fourteen Children,"--"Done," said the necessitous Cousin; went to
Weverlingen accordingly; and there lived the rest of his days,
till 1708; leaving his necessitous Fourteen, or about Ten of
them that were alive and growing up, still all minors, and
necessitous enough.

The young men, George Friedrich at the top of them, kept silence
in Weverlingen, and conformed to Papa; having nothing to live upon
elsewhere. But they had their own thoughts; especially as their
Cousin of Baireuth was more and more likely to die childless.
And at length, being in the Kaiser's service as soldiers some of
them, and having made what interest was feasible, they, early in
Friedrich Wilhelm's reign, burst out. That is to say, appealed to
the REICHSHOFRATH (Imperial Aulic Council at Vienna; chief Court
of the Empire in such cases); openly protesting there, That their
Papa had no power to make such a bargain, selling their birthright
for immediate pottage; and that, in brief, they would not stand by
it at all;--and summoned Friedrich Wilhelm to show cause why
they should.

Long lawsuit, in consequence; lengthy law-pleadings, and much
parchment and wiggery, in that German Triple-Elixir of Chancery;--
little to the joy of Friedrich Wilhelm. Friedrich Wilhelm, from
the first, was fairness itself: "Pay me back the money; and let it
be, in all points, as you say!" answered Friedrich Wilhelm, from
the first. Alas, the money was eaten; how could the money be paid
back? The Reichshofrath dubitatively shook its wig, for years:
"Bargain bad in Law; but Money clearly repayable: the Money was
and is good;--what shall be done about the Money!" At length,
in 1722, Friedrich Wilhelm, of himself, settled with this present
Margraf, then Heir-Presumptive, How, by steady slow instalments,
it could be possible, from the revenues of Baireuth, thriftily
administered, to pay back that Half-Million and odd Thalers;
and the now Margraf, ever since his accession in 1726, has been
annually doing it. So that there is, at this time, nothing but
composed kinship and friendship between the two Courts, the little
and the big: only Friedrich Wilhelm, especially with his will
crossed in this matter of the Baireuth Marriage, thinks to
himself, "Throw more money into such a gulf? The 600,000 Thalers
had better be got out first!" and says, he will give no Dowry at
all, nor take any charge, not so much as give away the Bride, but
be passive in the matter.

Queen Sophie, delighted to conquer Grumkow at any rate, is charmed
with this notion of Baireuth; and for a moment forgets all other
considerations: Should England prove slack and fail, what a
resource will Baireuth be, compared with Weissenfels!
And Wilhelmina entering, her Majesty breaks forth into admiration
over the victory, or half-victory, just gained: What a husband for
you this, my dear, in comparison! And as Wilhelmina cannot quite
join in the rapture on a sudden; and cannot even consent, unless
Papa too give his real countenance to the match, Mamma flies out
upon the poor young Lady: [Wilhelmina, i. 201.] "Take the Grand
Turk or the Great Mogul, then," said the Queen, "and follow your
own caprice! I should not have brought so many sorrows on myself,
had I known you better. Follow the King's bidding, then; it is
your own affair. I will no longer trouble myself about your
concerns;--and spare me, please, the sorrow of your odious
presence, for I cannot stand it!" Wilhelmina wished to reply, but
the answer was, "Silence! Go, I tell you!" "And I retired all
in tears."

"All in tears." The Double-Marriage drifting furiously this long
while, in such a sea as never was; and breakers now Close a-lee,--
have the desperate crew fallen to staving-in the liquor-casks, and
quarrelling with one another?--Evident one thing is, her Majesty
cannot be considered a perfectly wise Mother! We shall see what
her behavior is, when Wilhelmina actually weds this respectable
young Prince. Ungrateful creature, to wish Papa's consent as well
as mine! that is the maternal feeling at this moment;
and Wilhelmina weeps bitterly, as one of the unluckiest of
young Ladies.

Nay, her Brother himself, who is sick of this permanent hurricane,
and would fain see the end of it at any price, takes Mamma's part;
and Wilhelmina and he come to high words on the matter. This was
the unkindest cut of all:--but, of course, this healed in a day.
Poor Prince, he has his own allowance of insults, disgraces,
blows; has just been found out in some plan, or suspicion of a
plan; found out to be in debt at least, and been half miraculously
pardoned;--and, except, in flight, he still sees no deliverance
ahead. Five days ago, 22d January, 1730, there came out a
Cabinet-Order (summary Act of Parliament, so to speak) against
"lending money to Princes of the Blood, were it even to the
Prince-Royal." A crime and misdemeanor, that shall now be;
and Forfeiture of the Money is only part of the penalty, according
to this Cabinet-Order. Rumor is, the Crown-Prince had purchased a
vehicle and appurtenances at Leipzig, and was for running off.
Certainty is, he was discovered to have borrowed 1,000 Thalers
from a certain moneyed man at Berlin (money made from French
scrip, in Mississippi Law's time);--which debt Friedrich Wilhelm
instantly paid. "Your whole debt, then, is that? Tell me the
whole!"--"My whole debt," answered the Prince; who durst not own
to about 9,000 other Thalers (1,500 pounds) he has borrowed from
other quarters, first and last. Friedrich Wilhelm saw perhaps some
premonition of flight, or of desperate measures, in this business;
and was unexpectedly mild: paid the 1,000 Thalers instantly;
adding the Cabinet-Order against future contingencies. [Ranke,
i. 296; Forster, &c.] The Prince was in this humor when he took
Mamma's side, and redoubled Wilhelmina's grief.


 DOUBLE-MARRIAGE, ON THE EDGE OF SHIPWRECK, FLIES OFF A KIND OF
 CARRIER-PIGEON, OR NOAH'S-DOVE, TO ENGLAND, WITH CRY FOR HELP.
 
Faithful Mamsell Bulow consoles the Princess: "Wait, I have news
that will put her Majesty in fine humor!"--And she really proved
as good as her word. Her news is, Dubourgay and Knyphausen, in
this extremity of pinch, have decided to send off not letters
merely; but a speaking Messenger to the English Court. One Dr.
Villa; some kind of "English Chaplain" here, [Wilhelmina, i. 203;
Dubourgay's Despatch, 28th January, 1730.] whose chief trade is
that he teaches Wilhelmina English; Rev. Dr. Villa, who honors
Wilhelmina as he ought, shall be the man. Is to go instantly;
will explain what the fatal pass we are reduced to is, and whether
Princess Wilhelmina is the fright some represent her there or not.

Her Majesty is overjoyed to hear it: who would not be? Her Majesty
"writes Letters" of the due vehemency, thinks Wilhelmina,--dare
not write at all, says Dubourgay;--but loads Villa with presents,
with advices; with her whole heart speeds him under way.
"Dismissed, turned off for some fault or other--or perhaps because
the Princess knows enough of English?" so the rumor goes, in
Villa's Berlin circle.

"The Chaplain set out with his despatches," says Wilhelmina, who
does not name him, but is rather eloquent upon his errand; "loaded
with presents from the Queen. On taking leave of me he wept warm
tears. He said, saluting in the English fashion,"--I hope with
bended knee, and the maiden's fingers at his lips--"'He would deny
his Country, if it did not do its duty on this occasion.'" And so
hastened forth on his errand. Like a Carrier-Pigeon sent in
extremity;--like Noah's-Dove in the Deluge: may he revisit our
perishing Ark with Olive in his bill!



END OF BOOK 6





End of Project Gutenberg's Etext History of Friedrich II of Prussia V 6

