The Project Gutenberg EBook of Canadian Crusoes, by Catherine Parr Traill
#3 in our series by Catherine Parr Traill

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Canadian Crusoes

Author: Catherine Parr Traill

Release Date: June, 2005 [EBook #8382]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on July 5, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANADIAN CRUSOES ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Widger,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




CANADIAN CRUSOES.

A Tale

of

THE RICE LAKE PLAINS.

CATHARINE PARR TRAIL,

AUTHORESS OF "THE BACKWOODS OF CANADA, ETC."

EDITED BY AGNES STRICKLAND.

ILLUSTRATED BY HARVEY.

LONDON:

ARTHUR HALL, VIRTUE, & CO.

25, PATERNOSTER ROW.

1852. DEDICATED

TO THE CHILDREN OF THE SETTLERS

ON

THE RICE LAKE PLAINS,

BY THEIR

FAITHFUL FRIEND AND WELL-WISHER

THE AUTHORESS.

OAKLANDS, RICE LAKE,

15_th Oct_ 1850 PREFACE

IT will be acknowledged that human sympathy irresistibly responds to any
narrative, founded on truth, which graphically describes the struggles of
isolated human beings to obtain the aliments of life. The distinctions
of pride and rank sink into nought, when the mind is engaged in the
contemplation of the inevitable consequences of the assaults of the gaunt
enemies, cold and hunger. Accidental circumstances have usually given
sufficient experience of their pangs, even to the most fortunate, to make
them own a fellow-feeling with those whom the chances of shipwreck, war,
wandering, or revolutions have cut off from home and hearth, and the
requisite supplies; not only from the thousand artificial comforts which
civilized society classes among the necessaries of life, but actually from
a sufficiency of "daily bread."

Where is the man, woman, or child who has not sympathized with the poor
seaman before the mast, Alexander Selkirk, typified by the genius of Defoe
as his inimitable Crusoe, whose name (although one by no means uncommon
in middle life in the east of England,) has become synonymous for all who
build and plant in a wilderness, "cut off from humanity's reach?" Our
insular situation has chiefly drawn the attention of the inhabitants of
Great Britain to casualties by sea, and the deprivations of individuals
wrecked on some desert coast; but it is by no means generally known that
scarcely a summer passes over the colonists in Canada, without losses of
children from the families of settlers occurring in the vast forests of the
backwoods, similar to that on which the narrative of the Canadian Crusoes
is founded. Many persons thus lost have perished in the wilderness; and it
is to impress on the memory the natural resources of this country, by the
aid of interesting the imagination, that the author of the well-known and
popular work, "The Backwoods of Canada," has written the following pages.

She has drawn attention, in the course of this volume, to the practical
solution [Footnote: See Appendix A; likewise p. 310.] of that provoking
enigma, which seems to perplex all anxious wanderers in an unknown land,
namely, that finding themselves, at the end of a day's toilsome march,
close to the spot from which they set out in the morning, and that this
cruel accident will occur for days in succession. The escape of Captain
O'Brien from his French prison at Verdun, detailed with such spirit in his
lively autobiography, offers remarkable instances of this propensity of the
forlorn wanderer in a strange land. A corresponding incident is recorded in
the narrative of the "Escape of a young French Officer from the depot near
Peterborough during the Napoleon European war." He found himself thrice at
night within sight of the walls of the prison from which he had fled in the
morning, after taking fruitless circular walks of twenty miles. I do
not recollect the cause of such lost labour being explained in either
narrative; perhaps the more frequent occurrence of the disaster in the
boundless backwoods of the Canadian colonies, forced knowledge, dearly
bought, on the perceptions of the settlers. Persons who wander without
knowing the features and landmarks of a country, instinctively turn their
faces to the sun, and for that reason always travel in a circle, infallibly
finding themselves at night in the very spot from which they started in
the morning. The resources and natural productions of the noble colony of
Canada are but superficially known. An intimate acquaintance with its rich
vegetable and animal productions is most effectually made under the high
pressure of difficulty and necessity. Our writer has striven to interest
children, or rather young people approaching the age of adolescence, in the
natural history of this country, simply by showing them how it is possible
for children to make the best of it when thrown into a state of destitution
as forlorn as the wanderers on the Rice Lake Plains. Perhaps those who
would not care for the berry, the root, and the grain, as delineated and
classified technically in books of science, might remember their uses
and properties when thus brought practically before their notice as the
aliments of the famishing fellow-creature, with whom their instinctive
feelings must perforce sympathies. When parents who have left home comforts
and all the ties of gentle kindred for the dear sakes of their rising
families, in order to place them in a more independent position, it is well
if those young minds are prepared with some knowledge of what they are to
find in the adopted country; the animals, the flowers, the fruits, and even
the minuter blessings which a bountiful Creator has poured forth over that
wide land.

The previous work of my sister, Mrs. Traill, "The Backwoods of Canada, by
the Wife of an Emigrant Officer," published some years since by Mr. C.
Knight, in his Library of Useful Knowledge, has passed through many
editions, and enjoyed, (anonymous though it was,) too wide a popularity as
a standard work for me to need to dwell on it, further than to say that
the present is written in the same _naive_, charming style, with the
same modesty and uncomplaining spirit, although much has the sweet and
gentle--author endured, as every English lady must expect to do who
ventures to encounter the lot of a colonist. She has now devoted her
further years of experience as a settler to the information of the
younger class of colonists, to open their minds and interest them in the
productions of that rising country, which will one day prove the mightiest
adjunct of the island empire; our nearest, our soundest colony, unstained
with the corruption of convict population; where families of gentle blood
need fear no real disgrace in their alliance; where no one need beg, and
where any one may dig without being ashamed. LIST OF ENGRAVINGS.

LOUIS CONFESSING HIS DECEPTION OF CATHARINE

THE FIRST BREAKFAST

CATHARINE FOUND BY THE OLD DOG

WOLF FINDING THE WOUNDED DOE

HECTOR BRINGING THE INDIAN GIRL

KILLING WILD FOWL

INDIAN WOMAN AT THE DOOR OF THE HUT

CATHARINE CARRIED OFF

INDIANA BEFORE THE BALD EAGLE

INDIANA AT THE STAKE

ATTACK ON THE DEER

RETURN HOME THE

CANADIAN CRUSOES.




CHAPTER I.

  "The morning had shot her bright streamers on high,
  O'er Canada, opening all pale to the sky;

  Still dazzling and white was the robe that she wore,
  Except where the ocean wave lash'd on the shore."
  _Jacobite Song._

THERE lies between the Rice Lake and the Ontario, a deep and fertile
valley, surrounded by lofty wood-crowned hills, the heights of which were
clothed chiefly with groves of oak and pine, though the sides of the hills
and the alluvial bottoms gave a variety of noble timber trees of various
kinds, as the maple, beech, hemlock, and others. This beautiful and highly
picturesque valley is watered by many clear streams of pure refreshing
water, from whence the spot has derived its appropriate appellation of
"Cold Springs." At the time my little history commences, this now highly
cultivated spot was an unbroken wilderness,--all tut two small farms, where
dwelt the only occupiers of the soil,--which owned no other possessors than
the wandering hunting tribes of wild Indians, to whom the right of the
hunting grounds north of Rice Lake appertained, according to their forest
laws.

To those who travel over beaten roads, now partially planted, among
cultivated fields and flowery orchards, and see cleared farms and herds of
cattle and flocks of sheep, the change would be a striking one. I speak of
the time when the neat and flourishing town of Cobourg, now an important
port on the Ontario, was but a village in embryo--if it contained even
a log-house or a block-house it was all that it did, and the wild and
picturesque ground upon which the fast increasing village of Port Hope is
situated, had not yielded one forest tree to the axe of the settler. No
gallant vessel spread her sails to waft the abundant produce of grain and
Canadian stores along the waters of that noble sheet of water; no steamer
had then furrowed its bosom with her iron wheels, bearing the stream of
emigration towards the wilds of our Northern and Western forests, there to
render a lonely trackless desert a fruitful garden. What will not time and
the industry of man, assisted by the blessing of a merciful God, effect?
To him be the glory and honour; for we are taught, that "without the Lord
build the city, their labour is but lost that build it; without the Lord
keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain."

But to my tale. And first it will be necessary to introduce to the
acquaintance of my young readers the founders of our little settlement at
Cold Springs.

Duncan Maxwell was a young Highland soldier, a youth of eighteen, at the
famous battle of Quebec, where, though only a private, he received the
praise of his colonel for his brave conduct. At the close of the battle
Duncan was wounded, and as the hospital was full at the time with sick and
disabled men, he was lodged in the house of a poor French Canadian widow in
the Quebec suburb; here, though a foreigner and an enemy, he received much
kind attention from his excellent hostess and her family, which consisted
of a young man about his own age, and a pretty black-eyed lass not more
than sixteen. The widow Perron was so much occupied with other-lodgers--for
she kept a sort of boarding-house--that she had not much time to give to
Duncan, so that he was left a great deal to her son Pierre, and a little to
Catharine, her daughter.

Duncan Maxwell was a fine, open-tempered, frank lad, and he soon won the
regard of Pierre and his little sister. In spite of the prejudices of
country, and the difference of language and national customs, a steady and
increasing friendship grew up between the young Highlander and the children
of his hostess; therefore it was not without feelings of deep regret that
they heard the news, that the corps to which Duncan belonged was ordered
for embarkation to England, and Duncan was so far convalescent as to be
pronounced quite well enough to join them. Alas for poor Catharine! she now
found that parting with her patient was a source of the deepest sorrow to
her young and guileless heart; nor was Duncan less moved at the separation
from his gentle nurse. It might be for years, and it might be for ever,
he could not tell; but he could not tear himself away without telling the
object of his affections how dear she was to him, and to whisper a hope
that he might yet return one day to claim her as his bride; and Catharine,
weeping and blushing, promised to wait for that happy day, or to remain
single for his sake, while Pierre promised to watch over his friend's
interests and keep alive Catharine's love; for, said he, artlessly, "la
belle Catrine is pretty and lively, and may have many suitors before she
sees you again, mon ami."

They say the course of true love never did run smooth; but, with the
exception of this great sorrow, the sorrow of separation, the love of our
young Highland soldier and his betrothed knew no other interruption, for
absence served only to strengthen the affection which was founded on
gratitude and esteem.

Two long years passed, however, and the prospect of re-union was yet
distant, when an accident, which disabled Duncan from serving his country,
enabled him to retire with the usual little pension, and return to Quebec
to seek his affianced. Some changes had taken place during that short
period: the widow Perron was dead; Pierre, the gay, lively-hearted Pierre,
was married to the daughter of a lumberer; and Catharine, who had no
relatives in Quebec, had gone up the country with her brother and his wife,
and was living in some little settlement above Montreal with them.

Thither Duncan, with the constancy of his nature, followed, and shortly
afterwards was married to his faithful Catharine. On one point they had
never differed, both being of the same religion. Pierre had seen a good
deal of the fine country on the shores of the Ontario; he had been hunting
with some friendly Indians between the great waters and the Rice Lake, and
he now thought if Duncan and himself could make up their minds to a quiet
life in the woods, there was not a better spot than the hill pass between
the plains and the big lake to fix themselves upon. Duncan was of the same
opinion when he saw the spot. It was not rugged and bare like his own
Highlands, but softer in character, yet his heart yearned for the hill
country. In those days there was no obstacle to taking possession of any
tract of land in the unsurveyed forests, therefore Duncan agreed with his
brother-in-law to pioneer the way with him, get a dwelling put up and some
ground prepared and "seeded down," and then to, return for their wives and
settle themselves down at once as farmers. Others had succeeded, had formed
little colonies, and become the heads of villages in due time; why should
not they? And now behold our two backwoodsmen fairly commencing their
arduous life; but it was nothing, after all, to Pierre, by previous
occupation a hardy lumberer, or the Scottish soldier, accustomed to brave
all sorts of hardships in a wild country, himself a mountaineer, inured
to a stormy climate, and scanty fare, from his earliest youth. But it is
not my intention to dwell upon the trials and difficulties courageously met
and battled with by our settlers and their young wives.

There was in those days a spirit of resistance among the first settlers on
the soil, a spirit to do and bear, that is less commonly met with now. The
spirit of civilization is now so widely diffused, that her comforts are
felt even in the depths of the forest, so that the newly come emigrant
feels comparatively few of the physical evils that were endured by the
older inhabitants.

The first seed-wheat that was cast into the ground by Duncan and Pierre,
was brought with infinite trouble a distance of fifty miles in a little
skiff, navigated along the shores of the Ontario by the adventurous Pierre,
and from the nearest landing-place transported on the shoulders of himself
and Duncan to their homestead:--a day of great labour but great joy it was
when they deposited their precious freight in safety on the shanty floor.
They were obliged to make two journeys for the contents of the little
craft. What toil, what privation they endured for the first two years! and
now the fruits of it began slowly to appear. No two creatures could be more
unlike than Pierre and Duncan. The Highlander, stern, steady, persevering,
cautious, always giving ample reasons for his doing or his not doing. The
Canadian, hopeful, lively, fertile in expedients, and gay as a lark; if one
scheme failed another was sure to present itself. Pierre and Duncan were
admirably suited to be friends and neighbours. The steady perseverance of
the Scot helped to temper the volatile temperament of the Frenchman. They
generally contrived to compass the same end by different means, as two
streams descending from opposite hills will meet in one broad river in the
same valley.

Years passed on; the farm, carefully cultivated, began to yield its
increase, and food and warm clothing were not wanted in the homesteads.
Catharine had become, in course of time, the happy mother of four healthy
children; her sister-in-law had even exceeded her in these welcome
contributions to the population of a new colony. Between the children of
Pierre and Catharine the most charming harmony prevailed; they grew up as
one family, a pattern of affection and early friendship. Though different
in tempers and dispositions, Hector Maxwell, the eldest son of the Scottish
soldier, and his cousin, young Louis Perron, were greatly attached;
they, with the young Catharine and Mathilde, formed a little coterie of
inseparables; their amusements, tastes, pursuits, occupations, all blended
and harmonized delightfully; there were none of those little envyings and
bickerings among them that pave the way to strife and disunion in after
life.

Catharine Maxwell and her cousin Louis were more like brother and sister
than Hector and Catharine, but Mathilde was gentle and dove-like, and
formed a contrast to the gravity of Hector and the vivacity of Louis and
Catharine.

Hector and Louis were fourteen--strong, vigorous, industrious and hardy,
both in constitution and habits. The girls were turned of twelve. It is
not with Mathilde that our story is connected, but with the two lads and
Catharine. With the gaiety and naivete of the Frenchwoman, Catharine
possessed, when occasion called it into action, a thoughtful and
well-regulated mind, abilities which would well have repaid the care of
mental cultivation; but of book-learning she knew nothing beyond a little
reading, and that but imperfectly, acquired from her father's teaching. It
was an accomplishment which he had gained when in the army, having been
taught by his colonel's son, a lad of twelve years of age, who had taken a
great fancy to him, and had at parting given him a few of his school-books,
among which was a Testament, without cover or title-page. At parting, the
young gentleman recommended its daily perusal to Duncan. Had the gift been
a Bible, perhaps the soldier's obedience to his priest might have rendered
it a dead letter to him, but as it fortunately happened, he was unconscious
of any prohibition to deter him from becoming acquainted with the truths of
the Gospel. He communicated the power of perusing his books to his children
Hector and Catharine, Duncan and Kenneth, in succession, with a feeling of
intense reverence; even the labour of teaching was regarded as a holy duty
in itself, and was not undertaken without deeply impressing the obligation
he was conferring upon them whenever they were brought to the task. It was
indeed a precious boon, and the children learned to consider it as the
pearl beyond all price in the trials that awaited them in their eventful
career. To her knowledge of religious truths young Catharine added an
intimate acquaintance with the songs and legends of her father's romantic
country, which was to her even as fairyland; often would her plaintive
ballads and old tales, related in the hut or the wigwam to her attentive
auditors, wile away heavy thoughts; Louis and Mathilde, her cousins,
sometimes wondered how Catharine had acquired such a store of ballads and
wild tales as she could tell.

It was a lovely sunny day in the flowery month of June; Canada had not only
doffed that "dazzling white robe" mentioned in the songs of her Jacobite
emigrants, but had assumed the beauties of her loveliest season, the last
week in May and the first three of June being parallel to the English May,
full of buds and flowers and fair promise of ripening fruits. The high
sloping hills surrounding the fertile vale of Cold Springs were clothed
with the blossoms of the gorgeous scarlet enchroma, or painted-cup; the
large pure white blossoms of the lily-like trillium; the delicate and
fragile lilac geranium, whose graceful flowers woo the hand of the
flower-gatherer only to fade almost within his grasp; the golden
cyprepedium, or mocassin flower, so singular, so lovely in its colour and
formation, waved heavily its yellow blossoms as the breeze shook the stems;
and there, mingling with a thousand various floral beauties, the azure
lupine claimed its place, shedding almost a heavenly tint upon the earth.
Thousands of roses were blooming on the more level ground, sending forth
their rich fragrance, mixed with the delicate scent of the feathery
ceanothus, (New Jersey tea.) The vivid greenness of the young leaves of
the forest, the tender tint of the springing corn, were contrasted with the
deep dark fringe of waving pines on the hills, and the yet darker shade of
the spruce and balsams on the borders of the creeks, for so our Canadian
forest rills are universally termed. The bright glancing wings of the
summer red-bird, the crimson-headed woodpecker, the gay blue-bird, and
noisy but splendid plumed jay, might be seen among the branches; the air
was filled with beauteous sights and soft murmuring melodies. Under the
shade of the luxuriant hop-vines, that covered the rustic porch in front
of the little dwelling, the light step of Catharine Maxwell might be heard
mixed with the drowsy whirring of the big wheel, as she passed to and fro
guiding the thread of yarn in its course: and now she sang snatches of old
mountain songs, such as she had learned from her father; and now, with
livelier air, hummed some gay French tune to the household melody of her
spinning wheel, as she advanced and retreated with her thread, unconscious
of the laughing black eye that was watching her movements from among the
embowering foliage that shielded her from the morning sun.

"Come, ma belle cousine," for so Louis delighted to call her. "Hector and I
are waiting for you to go with us to the 'Beaver Meadow.' The cattle have
strayed, and we think we shall find them there. The day is delicious, the
very flowers look as if they wanted to be admired and plucked, and we shall
find early strawberries on the old Indian clearing."

Catharine cast a longing look abroad, but said, "I fear, Louis, I cannot go
to-day, for see, I have all these rolls of wool to spin up, and my yarn to
wind off the reel and twist; and then, my mother is away."

"Yes, I left her with mamma." replied Louis, "and she said she would be
home shortly, so her absence need not stay you. She said you could take a
basket and try and bring home some berries for sick Louise. Hector is sure
he knows a spot where we shall get some fine ones, ripe and red." As he
spoke Louis whisked away the big wheel to one end of the porch, gathered up
the hanks of yarn and tossed them into the open wicker basket, and the next
minute the large, coarse, flapped straw hat, that hung upon the peg in the
porch, was stuck not very gracefully on the top of Catharine's head
and tied beneath her chin, with a merry rattling laugh, which drowned
effectually the small lecture that Catharine began to utter, by way of
reproving the light-hearted boy.

"But where is Mathilde?"

"Sitting like a dear good girl, as she is, with sick Louise's head on
her lap, and would not disturb the poor sick thing for all the fruit and
flowers in Canada. Marie cried sadly to go with us, but I promised her and
petite Louise lots of flowers and berries if we get them, and the dear
children were as happy as queens when I left them."

"But stay, cousin, you are sure my mother gave her consent to my going?
We shall be away chief part of the day. You know it is a long walk to the
Beaver Meadow and back again," said Catharine, hesitating as Louis took her
hand to lead her out from the porch.

"Yes, yes, ma belle," said the giddy boy, quickly; "so come along, for
Hector is waiting at the barn; but stay, we shall be hungry before we
return, so let us have some cakes and butter, and do not forget a tin-cup
for water."

Nothing doubting, Catharine, with buoyant spirits, set about her little
preparations, which were soon completed; but just as she was leaving the
little garden enclosure, she ran back to kiss Kenneth and Duncan, her young
brothers. In the farm yard she found Hector with his axe on his shoulder.
"What are you taking the axe for, Hector? you will find it heavy to carry,"
said his sister.

"In the first place, I have to cut a stick of blue-beech to make a broom
for sweeping the house, sister of mine; and that is for your use, Miss
Kate; and in the next place, I have to find, if possible, a piece of rock
elm or hiccory for axe handles; so now you have the reason why I take the
axe with me."

The children now left the clearing, and struck into one of the deep defiles
that lay between the hills, and cheerfully they laughed and sung and
chattered, as they sped on their pleasant path; nor were they both to
exchange the glowing sunshine for the sober gloom of the forest shade. What
handfuls of flowers of all hues, red, blue, yellow and white, were gathered
only to be gazed at, carried for a while, then cast aside for others
fresher and fairer. And now they came to cool rills that flowed, softly
murmuring, among mossy limestone, or blocks of red or grey granite, wending
their way beneath twisted roots and fallen trees; and often Catharine
lingered to watch the eddying dimples of the clear water, to note the, tiny
bright fragments of quartz or crystallized limestone that formed a shining
pavement below the stream; and often she paused to watch the angry
movements of the red squirrel, as, with feathery tail erect, and sharp
scolding note, he crossed their woodland path, and swiftly darting up the
rugged bark of some neighbouring pine or hemlock, bade the intruders on
his quiet haunts defiance; yet so bold in his indignation, he scarcely
condescended to ascend beyond their reach.

The long-continued hollow tapping of the large red-headed woodpecker, or
the singular subterranean sound caused by the drumming of the partridge,
striking his wings upon his breast to woo his gentle mate, and the soft
whispering note of the little tree-creeper, as it flitted from one hemlock
to another, collecting its food between the fissures of the bark, were
among the few sounds that broke the noontide stillness of the woods; but
to all such sights and sounds the lively Catharine and her cousin were
not indifferent. And often they wondered, that Hector gravely pursued his
onward way, and seldom lingered as they did to mark the bright colours of
the flowers, or the bright sparkling of the forest rill.

"What makes Hec so grave?" said Catharine to her companion, as they seated
themselves upon a mossy trunk, to await his coming up, for they had giddily
chased each other till they had far outrun him.

"Hector, sweet coz, is thinking perhaps of how many bushels of corn or
wheat this land would grow if cleared, or he may be examining the soil or
the trees, or is looking for his stick of blue-beech for your broom, or the
hiccory for his axe handle, and never heeding such nonsense as woodpeckers
and squirrels, and lilies and moss and ferns, for Hector is not a giddy
thing like his cousin Louis, or--"

"His sister Kate," interrupted Catharine, merrily; "but when shall we come
to the Beaver Meadow?"

"Patience, ma belle, all in good time. Hark, was not that the ox-bell? No;
Hector whistling." And soon they heard the heavy stroke of his axe ringing
among the trees, for he had found the blue-beech, and was cutting it to
leave on the path, that he might take it home on their return; he had also
marked some hiccory of a nice size for his axe handles, to bring home
at some future time.

The children had walked several miles, and were not sorry to sit down and
rest till Hector joined them. He was well pleased with his success, and
declared he felt no fatigue. "As soon as we reach the old Indian clearing,
we shall find strawberries," he said, "and a fresh cold spring, and then we
will have our dinners."

"Come, Hector,--come, Louis," said Catharine, jumping up, "I long to be
gathering the strawberries; and see, my flowers are faded, so I will throw
them away, and the basket shall be filled with fresh fruit instead, and we
must not forget petite Marie and sick Louise, or dear Mathilde. Ah, how I
wish she were here at this minute! But here is the opening to the Beaver
Meadow."

And the sunlight was seen streaming through the opening trees as they
approached the cleared space, which some called the "Indian clearing," but
is now more generally known as the little Beaver Meadow. It was a pleasant
spot, green, and surrounded with light bowery trees and flowering shrubs,
of a different growth from those that belong to the dense forest. Here the
children found, on the hilly ground above, fine ripe strawberries, the
earliest they had seen that year, and soon all weariness was forgotten
while pursuing the delightful occupation of gathering the tempting fruit;
and when they had refreshed themselves, and filled the basket with leaves
and fruit, they slaked their thirst from the stream, which wound its way
among the bushes. Catharine neglected not to reach down flowery bunches of
the fragrant white-thorn and of the high-bush cranberry, then radiant with
nodding umbels of snowy blossoms, or to wreath the handle of the little
basket with the graceful trailing runners of the lovely twin-flowered
plant, the Linnaea borealis, which she always said reminded her of the
twins, Louise and Marie, her little cousins. And now the day began to wear
away, for they had lingered long in the little clearing; they had wandered
from the path by which they entered it; and had neglected, in their
eagerness to look for the strawberries, to notice any particular mark by
which they might regain it. Just when they began to think of returning,
Louis noticed a beaten path, where there seemed recent prints of cattle
hoofs on a soft spongy soil beyond the creek.

"Come, Hector," said he gaily, "this is lucky; we are on the cattle path;
no fear but it will lead us directly home, and that by a nearer track."

Hector was undecided about following it, he fancied it bent too much
towards the setting sun; but his cousin overruled his objection. "And is
not this our own creek?" he said: "I have often heard my father say it had
its rise somewhere about this old clearing."

Hector now thought Louis might be right, and they boldly followed the path
among the poplars and thorns and bushes that clothed its banks, surprised
to see how open the ground became, and how swift and clear the stream swept
onward.

"Oh, this dear creek," cried the delighted Catharine, "how pretty it is! I
shall often follow its course after this; no doubt it has its source from
our own Cold Springs."

And so they cheerfully pursued their way, till the sun, sinking behind
the range of westerly hills, soon left them in gloom; but they anxiously
hurried forward when the stream wound its noisy way among steep stony
banks, clothed scantily with pines and a few scattered silver-barked
poplars. And now they became bewildered by two paths leading in opposite
directions; one upward among the rocky hills, the other through the opening
gorge of a deep ravine.

Here, overcome with fatigue, Catharine seated herself on a large block of
granite, near a great bushy pine that grew beside the path by the ravine,
unable to proceed, and Hector, with a grave and troubled countenance,
stood beside her, looking round with an air of great perplexity. Louis,
seating himself at Catharine's feet, surveyed the deep gloomy valley before
them, and sighed heavily. The conviction had now forcibly struck him that
they had mistaken the path altogether. The very aspect of the country was
different; the growth of the trees, the flow of the stream, all indicated a
change of soil and scene. Darkness was fast drawing its impenetrable veil
around them; a few stars were stealing out, and gleaming down as if with
pitying glance upon the young wanderers; but they could not light up their
pathway, or point their homeward track. The only sound, save the lulling
murmur of the rippling stream below, was the plaintive note of the
whip-poor-will, from a gnarled oak that grew near them, and the harsh
grating scream of the night hawk, darting about in the higher regions of
the air, pursuing its noisy congeners, or swooping down with that peculiar
hollow rushing sound, as of a person blowing into some empty vessel, when
it seizes with wide-extended bill its insect prey.

Hector was the first to break the silence. "Cousin Louis, we were wrong in
following the course of the stream; I fear we shall never find our way back
to-night."

Louis made no reply; his sad and subdued air failed not to attract the
attention of his cousins. "Why, Louis, how is this? you are not used to be
cast down by difficulties," said Hector, as he marked something like tears
glistening in the dark eyes of his cousin.

Louis's heart was full, he did not reply, but cast a troubled glance upon
the weary Catharine, who leaned heavily against the tree beneath which she
sat.

"It is not," resumed Hector, "that I mind passing a summer's night under
such a sky as this, and with such a dry grassy bed below me; but I do not
think it is good for Catharine to sleep on the bare ground in the night
dews,--and then they will be so anxious at home about our absence."

Louis burst into tears, and sobbed out,--"And it is all my doing that
she came out with us; I deceived her, and my aunt will be angry and much
alarmed, for she did not know of her going at all. Dear Catharine, good
cousin Hector, pray forgive me!" But Catharine was weeping too much to
reply to his passionate entreaties, and Hector, who never swerved from the
truth, for which he had almost a stern reverence, hardly repressed his
indignation at what appeared to him a most culpable act of deceit on the
part of Louis.

The sight of her cousin's grief and self-abasement touched the tender
heart of Catharine, for she was kind and dove-like in her disposition,
and loved Louis, with all his faults. Had it not been for the painful
consciousness of the grief their unusual absence would occasion at home,
Catharine would have thought nothing of their present adventure; but she
could not endure the idea of her high-principled father taxing her with
deceiving her kind indulgent mother and him: it was this humiliating
thought which wounded the proud heart of Hector, causing him to upbraid his
cousin in somewhat harsh terms for his want of truthfulness, and steeled
him against the bitter grief that wrung the heart of the penitent Louis,
who, leaning his wet cheek on the shoulder of the kinder Catharine,
sobbed as if his heart would break, heedless of her soothing words and
affectionate endeavours to console him.

"Dear Hector," she said, turning her soft, pleading eyes on the stem face
of her brother, "you must not be so very angry with poor Louis; remember it
was to please me, and give me the enjoyment of a day of liberty with you
and himself in the woods, among the flowers and trees and birds, that he
committed this fault."

"Catharine, Louis spoke an untruth and acted deceitfully, and look at the
consequences,--we shall have forfeited our parents' confidence, and may
have some days of painful privation to endure before we regain our home, if
we ever do find our way back to Cold Springs," replied Hector.

"It is the grief and anxiety our dear parents will endure this night,"
answered Catharine, "that distresses my mind; but," she added in more
cheerful tones, "let us not despair, no doubt to-morrow we shall be able to
retrace our steps."

With the young there is ever a magical spell in that little word
_to-morrow_,--it is a point which they pursue as fast as it recedes from
them; sad indeed is the young heart that does not look forward with hope to
the morrow!

The cloud still hung on Hector's brow, till Catharine gaily exclaimed,
"Come, Hector! come, Louis! we must not stand idling thus; we must think of
providing some shelter for the night; it is not good to rest upon the bare
ground exposed to the night dews.--See, here is a nice hut, half made,"
pointing to a large upturned root which some fierce whirlwind had hurled
from the lofty bank into the gorge of the dark glen.

"Now you must make haste, and lop off a few pine boughs, and stick them
into the ground, or even lean them against the roots of this old oak, and
there, you see, will be a capital house to shelter us. To work, to work,
you idle boys, or poor wee Katty must turn squaw and build her own wigwam,"
she playfully added, taking up the axe which rested against the feathery
pine beneath which Hector was leaning. Now, Catharine cared as little as
her brother and cousin about passing a warm summer's night under the shade
of the forest trees, for she was both hardy and healthy; but her woman's
heart taught her that the surest means of reconciling the cousins would be
by mutually interesting them in the same object,--and she was right. In
endeavouring to provide for the comfort of their dear companion, all angry
feelings were forgotten by Hector, while active employment chased away
Louis's melancholy.

Unlike the tall, straight, naked trunks of the pines of the forest, those
of the plains are adorned with branches often to the very ground, varying
in form and height, and often presenting most picturesque groups, or rising
singly among scattered groves of the silver-barked poplar or graceful
birch-trees; the dark, mossy greenness of the stately pine contrasting
finely with the light waving foliage of its slender graceful companions.

Hector, with his axe, soon lopped boughs from one of the adjacent pines,
which Louis sharpened with his knife, and with Catharine's assistance drove
into the ground, arranging them in such a way as to make the upturned oak,
with its roots and the earth which adhered to them, form the back part of
the hut, which, when completed, formed by no means a contemptible shelter.
Catharine then cut fern and deer grass with Louis's _couteau-de-chasse_,
which he always carried in a sheath at his girdle, and spread two beds,
one, parted off by dry boughs and bark, for herself in the interior of the
wigwam, and one for her brother and cousin nearer the entrance. When all
was finished to her satisfaction, she called the two boys, and, according
to the custom of her parents, joined them in the lifting up of their
hands as an evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. Nor were these
simple-hearted children backward in imploring help and protection from the
Most High. They earnestly prayed that no dangerous creature might come
near to molest them during the hours of darkness and helplessness, no evil
spirit visit them, no unholy or wicked thoughts intrude into their minds;
but that holy angels and heavenly thoughts might hover over them, and fill
their hearts with the peace of God which passeth all understanding.--And
the prayer of the poor wanderers was heard, for they slept that night in
peace, unharmed in the vast solitude. So passed their first night on the
Plains.




CHAPTER II.

"Fear not, ye are of more value than many sparrows."

The sun had risen in all the splendour of a Canadian summer morning, when
the sleepers arose from their leafy beds. In spite of the novelty of their
situation, they had slept as soundly and tranquilly as if they had been
under the protecting care of their beloved parents, on their little
paliasses of corn straw; but they had been cared for by Him who neither
slumbereth nor sleepeth, and they waked full of youthful hope, and in
fulness of faith in His mercy into whose hands they had commended their
souls and bodies before they retired to rest.

While the children slept in peace and safety, what terrors had filled the
minds of their distracted parents! what a night of anguish and sorrow had
they passed!

When night had closed in without bringing back the absent children, the
two fathers, lighting torches of fat pine, went forth in search of the
wanderers. How often did they raise their voices in hopes their loud
halloos might reach the hearing of the lost ones! How often did they check
their hurried steps to listen for some replying call! But the sighing
breeze in the pine tops, or sudden rustling of the leaves caused by the
flight of the birds, startled by the unusual glare of the torches, and the
echoes of their own voices, were the only sounds that met their anxious
ears. At daybreak they returned, sad and dispirited, to their homes, to
snatch a morsel of food, endeavour to cheer the drooping hearts of
the weeping mothers, and hurry off, taking different directions. But,
unfortunately, they had little clue to the route which Hector and Louis had
taken, there being many cattle paths through the woods. Louis's want of
truthfulness had caused this uncertainty, as he had left no intimation of
the path he purposed taking when he quitted his mother's house: he had
merely said he was going with Hector in search of the cattle, giving no
hint of his intention of asking Catharine to accompany them: he had but
told his sick sister, that he would bring home strawberries and flowers,
and that he would soon return. Alas, poor thoughtless Louis, how little did
you think of the web of woe you were then weaving for yourself, and all
those to whom you and your giddy companions were so dear! Children, think
twice, ere ye deceive once! Catharine's absence would have been quite
unaccountable but for the testimony of Duncan and Kenneth, who had received
her sisterly caresses before she joined Hector at the barn; and much her
mother marvelled what could have induced her good dutiful Catharine to have
left her work and forsaken her household duties to go rambling away with
the boys, for she never left the house when her mother was absent from, it,
without her express permission, and now she was gone--lost to them, perhaps
for ever. There stood the wheel she had been turning, there hung the
untwisted hanks of yarn, her morning task,--and there they remained week
after week and month after month, untouched, a melancholy memorial to the
hearts of the bereaved parents of their beloved.

It were indeed a fruitless task to follow the agonized fathers in their
vain search for their children, or to paint the bitter anguish that filled
their hearts as day passed after day, and still no tidings of the lost
ones. As hope faded, a deep and settled gloom stole over the sorrowing
parents, and reigned throughout the once cheerful and gladsome homes. At
the end of a week the only idea that remained was, that one of these three
casualties had befallen the lost children:--death, a lingering death
by famine; death, cruel and horrible, by wolves or bears; or yet more
terrible, with tortures by the hands of the dreaded Indians, who
occasionally held their councils and hunting parties on the hills about the
Rice Lake, which was known only by the elder Perron as the scene of many
bloody encounters between the rival tribes of the Mohawks and Chippewas:
its localities were scarcely ever visited by our settlers, lest haply
they should fall into the hands of the bloody Mohawks, whose merciless
dispositions made them in those days a by-word even to the less cruel
Chippewas and other Indian nations.

It was not in the direction of the Rice Lake that Maxwell and his
brother-in-law sought their lost children; and even if they had done so,
among the deep glens and hill passes of what is now commonly called the
Plains, they would have stood little chance of discovering the poor
wanderers. After many days of fatigue of body and distress of mind, the
sorrowing parents sadly relinquished the search as utterly hopeless,
and mourned in bitterness of spirit over the disastrous fate of their
first-born and beloved children.--"There was a voice of woe, and
lamentation, and great mourning; Rachel weeping for her children, and
refusing to be comforted, because they were not." The miserable uncertainty
that involved the fate of the lost ones was an aggravation to the
sufferings of the mourners: could they but have been certified of the
manner of their deaths, they fancied they should be more contented; but,
alas! this fearful satisfaction was withheld.

  "Oh, were their tale of sorrow known,
  'Twere something to the breaking heart,
  The pangs of doubt would then be gone,
  And fancy's endless dreams depart."

But let us quit the now mournful settlement of the Cold Springs, and see
how it really fared with the young wanderers.

When they awoke the valley was filled with a white creamy mist, that
arose from the bed of the stream, (now known as Cold Creek,) and gave an
indistinctness to the whole landscape, investing it with an appearance
perfectly different to that which it had worn by the bright, clear light of
the moon. No trace of their footsteps remained to guide them in retracing
their path; so hard and dry was the stony ground that it left no impression
on its surface. It was with some difficulty they found the creek, which was
concealed from sight by a lofty screen of gigantic hawthorns, high-bush
cranberries, poplars, and birch-trees. The hawthorn was in blossom, and
gave out a sweet perfume, not less fragrant than the "May" which makes the
lanes and hedgerows of "merrie old England" so sweet and fair in May and
June, as chanted in many a genuine pastoral of our olden time; but when our
simple Catharine drew down the flowery branches to wreathe about her hat,
she loved the flowers for their own native sweetness and beauty, not
because poets had sung of them;--but young minds have a natural poetry in
themselves, unfettered by rule or rhyme.

At length their path began to grow more difficult. A tangled mass of
cedars, balsams, birch, black ash, alders, and _tamarack_ (Indian name for
the larch), with a dense thicket of bushes and shrubs, such as love the
cool, damp soil of marshy ground, warned our travellers that they must
quit the banks of the friendly stream, or they might become entangled in
a trackless swamp. Having taken copious and refreshing draughts from the
bright waters, and bathed their hands and faces, they ascended the grassy
bank, and again descending, found themselves in one of those long valleys,
enclosed between lofty sloping banks, clothed with shrubs and oaks, with
here and there a stately pine. Through this second valley they pursued
their way, till emerging into a wider space, they came among those
singularly picturesque groups of rounded gravel hills, where the Cold Creek
once more met their view, winding its way towards a grove of evergreens,
where it was again lost to the eye.

This lovely spot is now known as Sackville's Mill-dike. The hand of man has
curbed the free course of the wild forest stream, and made it subservient
to his will, but could not destroy the natural beauties of the scene.
[Footnote: This place was originally owned by a man of taste, who resided
for some time upon the spot, till finding it convenient to return to his
native country, the saw-mill passed into other hands. The old log-house on
the green bank above the mill-stream is still standing, though deserted;
the garden fence, broken and dilapidated, no longer protects the enclosure,
where the wild rose mingles with that of Provence,--the Canadian creeper
with the hop.]

Fearing to entangle themselves in the swamp, they kept the hilly ground,
winding their way up to the summit of the lofty ridge of the oak hills,
the highest ground they had yet attained; and here it was that the silver
waters of the Rice Lake in all its beauty burst upon the eyes of the
wondering and delighted travellers. There it lay, a sheet of liquid silver
just emerging from the blue veil of mist that hung upon its surface, and
concealed its wooded shores on either side. All feeling of dread and doubt
and danger was lost, for the time, in one rapturous glow of admiration at a
scene so unexpected and so beautiful as that which they now gazed upon from
the elevation they had gained. From this ridge they looked down the lake,
and the eye could take in an extent of many miles, with its verdant wooded
islands, which stole into view one by one as the rays of the morning sun
drew up the moving curtain of mist that enveloped them; and soon both
northern and southern shores became distinctly visible, with all their bays
and capes and swelling oak and pine-crowned hills.

And now arose the question, "Where are we? What lake is this? Can it be
the Ontario, or is it the Rice Lake? Can yonder shores be those of the
Americans, or are they the hunting-grounds of the dreaded Indians?" Hector
remembered having often heard his father say that the Ontario was like an
inland sea, and the opposite shores not visible unless in some remarkable
state of the atmosphere, when they had been occasionally discerned by the
naked eye, while here they could distinctly see objects on the other side,
the peculiar growth of the trees, and even flights of wild fowl winging
their way among the rice and low bushes on its margin. The breadth of the
lake from shore to shore could not, they thought, exceed three or four
miles; while its length, in an easterly direction, seemed far greater
beyond--what the eye could take in. [Footnote: The length of the Rice Lake,
from its headwaters near Black's Landing to the mouth of the Trent, is said
to be twenty-five miles; its breadth from north to south varies from three
to six.]

They now quitted the lofty ridge, and bent their steps towards the lake.
Wearied with their walk, they seated themselves beneath the shade of a
beautiful feathery pine, on a high promontory that commanded a magnificent
view down the lake.

"How pleasant it would be to have a house on this delightful bank,
overlooking the lake," said Louis; "only think of the fish we could take,
and the ducks and wild fowl we could shoot! and it would be no very hard
matter to hollow out a log canoe, such a one as I have heard my father say
he has rowed in across many a lake and broad river--below, when he was
lumbering."

"Yes, it would, indeed, be a pleasant spot to live upon," [Footnote: Now
the site of a pleasant cottage, erected by an enterprising gentleman from
Devonshire, who has cleared and cultivated a considerable portion of the
ground described above; a spot almost unequalled in the plains for its
natural beauties and extent of prospect.] said Hector, "though I am not
quite sure that the land is as good just here as it is at Cold Springs;
but all these flats and rich valleys would make fine pastures, and produce
plenty of grain, too, if cultivated."

"You always look to the main chance, Hec," said Louis, laughing; "well, it
was worth a few hours' walking this morning to look upon so lovely a sheet
of water as this. I would spend two nights in a wigwam,--would not you, ma
belle?--to enjoy such a sight."

"Yes, Louis," replied his cousin, hesitating as she spoke; "it is very
pretty, and I did not mind sleeping in the little hut; but then I cannot
enjoy myself as much as I should have done had my father and mother been
aware of my intention of accompanying you. Ah, my dear, dear parents!" she
added, as the thought of the anguish the absence of her companions and
herself would cause at home came over her. "How I wish I had remained at
home! Selfish Catharine! foolish idle girl!"

Poor Louis was overwhelmed with grief at the sight of his cousin's tears,
and as the kind-hearted but thoughtless boy bent over her to soothe and
console her, his own tears fell upon the fair locks of the weeping girl,
and bedewed the hand he held between his own.

"If you cry thus, cousin," he whispered, "you will break poor Louis's
heart, already sore enough with thinking of his foolish conduct." "Be not
cast down, Catharine," said her brother, cheeringly: "we may not be so far
from home as you think. As soon as you are rested we will set out again,
and we may find something to eat; there must be strawberries on these sunny
banks."

Catharine soon yielded to the voice of her brother, and drying her eyes,
proceeded to descend the sides of the steep valley that lay to one side of
the high ground where they had been sitting.

Suddenly darting down the bank, she exclaimed, "Come, Hector; come, Louis:
here indeed is provision to keep us from starving:"--for her eye had caught
the bright red strawberries among the flowers and herbage on the slope;
large ripe strawberries, the very finest she had ever seen.

"There is indeed, ma belle," said Louis, stooping as he spoke to gather up,
not the fruit, but a dozen fresh partridge eggs from the inner shade of a
thick tuft of grass and herbs that grew beside a fallen tree. Catharine's
voice and sudden movements had startled the partridge [Footnote: The
Canadian partridge is a species of grouse, larger than the English or
French partridge. We refer our young readers to the finely arranged
specimens in the British Museum, (open to the public,) where they may
discover "Louis's partridge."] from her nest, and the eggs were soon
transferred to Louis's straw hat, while a stone flung by the steady
hand of Hector stunned the parent bird. The boys laughed exultingly as
they displayed their prizes to the astonished Catharine, who, in spite of
hunger, could not help regretting the death of the mother bird. Girls and
women rarely sympathise with men and boys in their field sports, and Hector
laughed at his sister's doleful looks as he handed over the bird to her.

"It was a lucky chance," said he, "and the stone was well aimed, but it is
not the first partridge that I have killed in this way. They are so stupid
you may even run them down at times; I hope to get another before the day
is over. Well, there is no fear of starving to-day, at all events," he
added, as he inspected the contents of his cousin's hat; "twelve nice fresh
eggs, a bird, and plenty of fruit."

"But how shall we cook the bird and the eggs? We have no means of getting a
fire made," said Catharine.

"As to the eggs," said Louis, "we can eat them raw; it is not for hungry
wanderers like us to be over nice about our food."

"They would satisfy us much better were they boiled, or roasted in the
ashes," observed Hector.

"True. Well, a fire, I think, can be got with a little trouble."

"But how?" asked Hector. "Oh, there are many ways, but the readiest would
be a flint with the help of my knife."

"A flint?"

"Yes, if we could get one--but I see nothing but granite, which crumbles
and shivers when struck--we could not get a spark. However, I think it's
very likely that one of the round pebbles I see on the beach yonder may be
found hard enough for the purpose."

To the shore they bent their steps as soon as the little basket had been
well filled with strawberries, and descending the precipitous bank, fringed
with young saplings, birch, ash, and poplars, they quickly found themselves
beside the bright waters of the lake. A flint was soon found among the
water-worn stones that lay thickly strewn upon the shore, and a handful of
dry sedge, almost as inflammable as tinder, was collected without trouble;
though Louis, with the recklessness of his nature, had coolly proposed
to tear a strip from his cousin's apron as a substitute for tinder,--a
proposal that somewhat raised the indignation of the tidy Catharine, whose
ideas of economy and neatness were greatly outraged, especially as she had
no sewing implements to assist in mending the rent. Louis thought nothing
of that; it was a part of his character to think only of the present,
little of the past, and to let the future provide for itself. Such was
Louis's great failing, which had proved a fruitful source of trouble both
to himself and others. In this respect he bore a striking contrast to his
more cautious companion, who possessed much of the gravity of his father.
Hector was as heedful and steady in his decisions as Louis was rash and
impetuous.

After many futile attempts, and some skin knocked off their knuckles
through awkward handling of the knife and flint, a good fire was at last
kindled, as there was no lack of dry wood on the shore; Catharine then
triumphantly produced her tin pot, and the eggs were boiled, greatly to the
satisfaction of all parties, who were by this time sufficiently hungry,
having eaten nothing since the previous evening more substantial than the
strawberries they had taken during the time they were gathering them in the
morning.

Catharine had selected a pretty, cool, shady recess, a natural bower, under
the overhanging growth of cedars, poplars, and birch, which were wreathed
together by the flexile branches of the vine and bitter-sweet,
which climbed to a height of fifteen feet [Footnote: _Solatnum
dulcamara_,--Bitter-sweet or Woody nightshade. This plant, like the
red-berried briony of England, is highly ornamental. It possesses powerful
properties as a medicine, and is in high reputation among the Indians.]
among the branches [Illustration: THE FIRST BREAKFAST] of the trees, which
it covered as with a mantle. A pure spring of cold, delicious water welled
out from beneath the twisted roots of an old hoary-barked cedar, and found
its way among the shingles on the beach to the lake, a humble but constant
tributary to its waters. Some large blocks of water-worn stone formed
convenient seats and a natural table, on which the little maiden arranged
the forest fare; and never was a meal made with greater appetite or taken
with more thankfulness than that which our wanderers ate that morning. The
eggs (part of which they reserved for another time) were declared to be
better than those that were daily produced from the little hen-house at
Cold Springs. The strawberries, set out in little pottles made with the
shining leaves of the oak, ingeniously pinned together by Catharine with
the long spurs of the hawthorn, [Footnote: The long-spurred American
hawthorn may be observed by our young readers among that beautiful
collection of the hawthorn family and its affinities, which flourish on the
north side of Kensington Gardens.] were voted delicious, and the pure water
most refreshing, that they drank, for lack of better cups, from a large
mussel-shell which Catharine had picked up among the weeds and pebbles on
the beach.

Many children would have wandered about weeping and disconsolate, lamenting
their sad fate, or have embittered the time by useless repining, or,
perhaps, by venting their uneasiness in reviling the principal author of
their calamity--poor, thoughtless Louis; but such were not the dispositions
of our young Canadians. Early accustomed to the hardships incidental to the
lives of the settlers in the bush, these young people had learned to bear
with patience and cheerfulness privations that would have crushed the
spirits of children more delicately nurtured. They had known every degree
of hunger and nakedness; during the first few years of their lives they had
often been compelled to subsist for days and weeks upon roots and herbs,
wild fruits, and game which their fathers had learned to entrap, to decoy,
and to shoot. Thus Louis and Hector had early been initiated into the
mysteries of the chase. They could make deadfalls, and pits, and traps, and
snares,--they were as expert as Indians in the use of the bow,--they could
pitch a stone, or fling a wooden dart at partridge, hare, and squirrel,
with almost unerring aim; and were as swift of foot as young fawns. Now
it was that they learned to value in its fullest extent this useful
and practical knowledge, which enabled them to face with fortitude the
privations of a life so precarious as that to which they were now exposed.

It was one of the elder Maxwell's maxims,--Never let difficulties overcome
you, but rather strive to conquer them; let the head direct the hand, and
the hand, like a well-disciplined soldier, obey the head as chief. When his
children expressed any doubts of not being able to accomplish any work they
had begun, he would say, "Have you not hands, have you not a head, have you
not eyes to see, and reason to guide you? As for impossibilities, they do
not belong to the trade of a soldier,--he dare not see them." Thus were
energy and perseverance early instilled into the minds of his children;
they were now called upon to give practical proofs of the precepts that had
been taught them in childhood. Hector trusted to his axe, and Louis to his
_couteau-de-chasse_ and pocket-knife; the latter was a present from an old
forest friend of his father's, who had visited them the previous winter,
and which, by good luck, Louis had in his pocket--a capacious pouch, in
which were stored many precious things, such as coils of twine and string,
strips of leather, with odds and ends of various kinds; nails, bits of
iron, leather, and such miscellaneous articles as find their way most
mysteriously into boys' pockets in general, and Louis Perron's in
particular, who was a wonderful collector of such small matters.

The children were not easily daunted by the prospect of passing a few days
abroad on so charming a spot, and at such a lovely season, where fruits
were so abundant; and when they had finished their morning meal, so
providentially placed within their reach, they gratefully acknowledged the
mercy of God in this thing.

Having refreshed themselves by bathing their hands and faces in the lake,
they cheerfully renewed their wanderings, though something both to leave
the cool shade and the spring for an untrodden path among the hills and
deep ravines that furrow the shores of the Rice Lake in so remarkable a
manner; and often did our weary wanderers pause to look upon the wild glens
and precipitous hills, where the fawn and the shy deer found safe retreats,
unharmed by the rifle of the hunter,--where the osprey and white-headed
eagle built their nests, unheeding and unharmed. Twice that day, misled by
following the track of the deer, had they returned to the same spot,--a
deep and lovely glen, which had once been a water-course, but now a green
and shady valley. This they named the Valley of the Rock, from a remarkable
block of red granite that occupied a central position in the narrow defile;
and here they prepared to pass the second night on the Plains. A few boughs
cut down and interlaced with the shrubs round a small space cleared with
Hector's axe, formed shelter, and leaves and grass, strewed on the ground,
formed a bed, though not so smooth, perhaps, as the bark and cedar-boughs
that the Indians spread within their summer wigwams for carpets and
couches, or the fresh heather that the Highlanders gather on the wild
Scottish hills.

While Hector and Louis were preparing the sleeping-chamber, Catharine
busied herself in preparing the partridge for their supper. Having
collected some thin peelings from the ragged bark of a birch-tree, that
grew on the side of the steep bank to which she gave the appropriate name
of the "Birken shaw," she dried it in her bosom, and then beat it fine
upon a big stone, till it resembled the finest white paper. This proved
excellent tinder, the aromatic oil contained in the bark of the birch being
highly inflammable, Hector had prudently retained the flint that they had
used in the morning, and a fire was now lighted in front of the rocky
stone, and a forked stick, stuck in the ground, and bent over the coals,
served as a spit, on which, gipsy-fashion, the partridge was suspended,--a
scanty meal, but thankfully partaken of, though they knew not how they
should breakfast next morning, The children felt they were pensioners on
God's providence not less than the wild denizens of the wilderness around
them.

When Hector--who by nature was less sanguine than his sister or
cousin--expressed some anxiety for their provisions for the morrow,
Catharine, who had early listened with trusting piety of heart to the
teaching of her father, when he read portions from the holy word of God,
gently laid her hand upon her brother's head, which rested on her knees,
as he sat upon the grass beside her, and said, in a low and earnest tone,
"'Consider the fowls of the air; they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much
better than they?' Surely, my brother, God careth for us as much as for the
wild creatures, that have no sense to praise and glorify his holy name. God
cares for the creatures He has made, and supplies them with knowledge where
they shall find food when they hunger and thirst. So I have heard my father
say; and surely our father knows, for is he not a wise man, Hector?"

"I remember," said Louis, thoughtfully, "hearing my mother repeat the words
of a good old man she knew when she lived in Quebec;--'When you are in
trouble, Mathilde,' he used to say to her, 'kneel down, and ask God's help,
nothing doubting but that He has the power as well as the will to serve
you, if it be for your good; for He is able to bring all things to pass.
It is our own want of faith that prevents our prayers from being heard.
And, truly, I think the wise old man was right," he added.

It was strange to hear grave words like these from the lips of the giddy
Louis. Possibly they had the greater weight on that account. And Hector,
looking up with a serious air, replied, "Your mother's friend was a good
man, Louis. Our want of trust in God's power must displease Him. And when
we think of all the great and glorious things He has made,--that blue sky,
those sparkling stars, the beautiful moon that is now shining down upon us,
and the hills and waters, the mighty forest, and little creeping plants and
flowers that grow at our feet,--it must, indeed, seem foolish in his eyes
that we should doubt his power to help us, who not only made all these
things, but ourselves also."

"True," said Catharine; "but then, Hector, we are not as God made us; for
the wicked one cast bad seed in the field where God had sown the good."

"Let us, however, consider what we shall do for food; for, you know, God
helps those that help themselves," said Louis. "Let us consider a little.
There must be plenty of fish in the lake, both small and great."

"But how are we to get them out of it?" rejoined Catharine. "I doubt the
fish will swim at their ease there, while we go hungry."

"Do not interrupt me, ma chere. Then, we see the track of deer, and the
holes of the wood-chuck; we hear the cry of squirrels and chipmunks, and
there are plenty of partridges, and ducks, and quails, and snipes; of
course, we have to contrive some way to kill them. Fruits there are in
abundance, and plenty of nuts of different kinds. At present we have plenty
of fine strawberries, and huckleberries will be ripe soon in profusion, and
bilberries too, and you know how pleasant they are; as for raspberries, I
see none; but by-and-by there will be May-apples--I see great quantities of
them in the low grounds, grapes, high-bush-cranberries, haws as large as
cherries, and sweet too; squaw-berries, wild plums, choke-cherries, and
bird-cherries. As to sweet acorns, there will be bushels and bushels of
them for the roasting, as good as chestnuts, to my taste; and butter-nuts,
and hickory-nuts,--with many other good things." And here Louis stopped for
want of breath to continue his catalogue of forest dainties.

"Yes; and there are bears, and wolves, and racoons, too, that will eat us
for want of better food," interrupted Hector, slyly. "Nay, Katty, do not
shudder, as if you were already in the clutches of a big bear. Neither bear
nor wolf shall make mincemeat of thee, my girl, while Louis and thy brother
are near, to wield an axe or a knife in thy defence."

"Nor catamount spring upon thee, ma belle cousine," added Louis, gallantly,
"while thy bold cousin Louis can scare him away."

"Well, now that we know our resources, the next thing is to consider how we
are to obtain them, my dears," said Catharine. "For fishing, you know, we
must have a hook and line, a rod, or a net. Now, where are these to be met
with?"

Louis nodded his head sagaciously. "The line I think I can provide; the
hook is more difficult, but I do not despair even of that. As to the rod,
it can be cut from any slender sapling on the shore. A net, ma chere, I
could make with very little trouble, if I had but a piece of cloth to sew
over a hoop."

Catharine laughed. "You are very ingenious, no doubt, Monsieur Louis, but
where are you to get the cloth and the hoop, and the means of sewing it
on?"

Lords took up the corner of his cousin's apron with a provoking look.

"My apron, sir, is not to be appropriated for any such purpose. You seem to
covet it for everything."

"Indeed, ma petite, I think it very unbecoming and very ugly, and never
could see any good reason why you and Mamma and Mathilde should wear such
frightful things."

"It is to keep our gowns clean, Louis, when we are milking and scrubbing,
and doing all sorts of household duties," said Catharine.

"Well, ma belle, you have neither cows to milk, nor house to clean,"
replied the annoying boy; "so there can be little want of the apron. I
could turn it to fifty useful purposes."

"Pooh, nonsense," said Hector, impatiently, "let the child alone, and do
not tease her about her apron."

"Well, then, there is another good thing I did not think of before, water
mussels. I have heard my father and old Jacob the lumberer say, that,
roasted in their shells in the ashes, with a seasoning of salt and pepper,
they are good eating when nothing better is to be got."

"No doubt, if the seasoning can be procured," said Hector, "but, alas for
the salt and the pepper!"

"Well, we can eat them with the best of all sauces--hunger; and then, no
doubt, there are crayfish in the gravel under the stones, but we must not
mind a pinch to our fingers in taking them."

"To-morrow then let us breakfast on fish," said Hector. "You and I will try
our luck, while Kate gathers strawberries; and if our line should break, we
can easily cut those long locks from Catharine's head, and twist them into
lines,"--and Hector laid his hands upon the long fair hair that hung in
shining curls about his sister's neck.

"Cut my curls! This is even worse than cousin Louis's proposal of making
tinder and fishing-nets of my apron," said Catharine, shaking back the
bright tresses, which, escaping from the snood that bound them, fell in
golden waves over her shoulders.

"In truth, Hec, it were a sin and a shame to cut her pretty curls, that
become her so well," said Louis. "But we have no scissors, ma belle, so you
need fear no injury to your precious locks."

"For the matter of that, Louis, we could cut them with your
_couteau-de-chasse_. I could tell you a story that my father told me, not
long since, of Charles Stuart, the second king of that name in England. You
know he was the grand-uncle of the young Chevalier Charles Edward, that my
father talks of, and loves so much."

"I know all about him," said Catharine, nodding sagaciously; "let us hear
the story of his grand-uncle. But I should like to know what my hair and
Louis's knife can have to do with King Charles."

"Wait a bit, Kate, and you shall hear, that is, if you have patience," said
her brother. "Well then, you must know, that after some great battle, the
name of which I forget, [Footnote: Battle of Worcester.] in which the
King and his handful of brave soldiers were defeated by the forces of the
Parliament, (the Roundheads, as they were called,) the poor young king was
hunted like a partridge upon the mountains; a large price was set on his
head, to be given to any traitor who should slay him, or bring him prisoner
to Oliver Cromwell. He was obliged to dress himself in all sorts of queer
clothes, and hide in all manner of strange, out of the way places, and keep
company with rude and humble men, the better to hide his real rank from
the cruel enemies that sought his life. Once he hid along with a gallant
gentleman, [Footnote: Colonel Careless.] one of his own brave officers, in
the branches of a great oak. Once he was hid in a mill; and another time he
was in the house of one Pendril, a woodman. The soldiers of the Parliament,
who were always prowling about, and popping in unawares wherever they
suspected the poor king to be hidden, were, at one time, in the very room
where he was standing beside the fire."

"Oh!" exclaimed Catharine, "that was frightful. And did they take him
prisoner?"

"No; for the wise woodman and his brothers, fearing lest the soldiers
should discover that he was a cavalier and a gentleman, by the long curls
that the king's men all wore in those days, and called _lovelocks_, begged
of his majesty to let his hair be cropped close to his head."

"That was very hard, to lose his nice curls."

"I dare say the voting king thought so too, but it was better to lose his
hair than his head. So, I suppose, the men told him, for he suffered them
to cut it all close to his head, laying down his head on a rough deal
table, or a chopping-block, while his faithful friends with a large knife
trimmed off the curls."

"I wonder if the young king thought at that minute of his poor father, who,
you know, was forced by wicked men to lay down his head upon a block
to have it cut from his shoulders, because Cromwell, and others as
hard-hearted as himself, willed that he should die." "Poor king!" said
Catharine, sighing, "I see that it is better to be poor children, wandering
on these plains under God's own care, than to be kings and princes at the
mercy of bad and sinful men."

"Who told your father all these things, Hec?" said Louis.

"It was the son of his brave colonel, who knew a great deal about the
history of the Stuart kings, for our colonel had been with Prince Charles,
the young chevalier, and fought by his side when he was in Scotland; he
loved him dearly, and, after the battle of Culloden, where the Prince lost
all, and was driven from place to place, and had not where to lay his head,
he went abroad in hopes of better times; (but those times did not come for
the poor Prince; and our colonel) after a while, through the friendship of
General Wolfe, got a commission in the army that was embarking for Quebec,
and, at last, commanded the regiment to which my father belonged. He was
a kind man, and my father loved both him and his son, and grieved not a
little when he parted from him."

"Well," said Catharine, "as you have told me such a nice story, Mister Hec,
I shall forgive the affront about my curls."

"Well, then, to-morrow we are to try our luck at fishing, and if we fail,
we will make us bows and arrows to kill deer or small game; I fancy we
shall not be over particular as to its of quality. Why should not we be
able to find subsistence as well as the wild Indians?"

"True," said Hector, "the wild men of the wilderness, and the animals and
birds, all are fed by the things that He provideth; then, wherefore should
His white children fear?"

"I have often heard my father tell of the privations of the lumberers, when
they have fallen short of provisions, and of the contrivances of himself
and old Jacob Morelle, when they were lost for several days, nay, weeks I
believe it was. Like the Indians, they made themselves bows and arrows,
using the sinews of the deer, or fresh thongs of leather, for bow-strings;
and when they could not get game to eat, they boiled the inner bark of the
slippery elm to jelly, or birch bark, and drank the sap of the sugar maple
when they could get no water but melted snow only, which is unwholesome; at
last, they even boiled their own mocassins."

"Indeed, Louis, that must have been a very unsavoury dish," said Catharine.

"That old buckskin vest would have made a famous pot of soup of itself,"
added Hector, "or the deer-skin hunting shirt." "Well, they might have been
reduced even to that," said Louis, laughing, "but for the good fortune that
befel them in the way of a half-roasted bear."

"Nonsense, cousin Louis, bears do not run about ready roasted in the
forest, like the lambs in the old nursery tale."

"Well now, Kate, this was a fact; at least, it was told as one by old
Jacob, and my father did not deny it; shall I tell you about it? After
passing several hungry days with no better food to keep them alive than the
scrapings of the inner bark of the poplars and elms, which was not very
substantial for hearty men, they encamped one night in a thick dark
swamp,--not the sort of place they would have chosen, but that they could
not help themselves, having been enticed into it by the tracks of a deer or
a moose,--and night came upon them unawares, so they set to work to kindle
up a fire with spunk, and a flint and knife; rifle they had none, or maybe
they would have had game to eat. Old Jacob fixed upon a huge hollow pine,
that lay across their path, against which he soon piled a glorious heap of
boughs and arms of trees, and whatever wood he could collect, and lighted
up a fine fire. You know what a noble hand old Jacob used to be at making
up a roaring fire; he thought, I suppose, if he could not have warmth
within, he would have plenty of it without. The wood was dry pine and cedar
and birch, and it blazed away, and crackled and burnt like a pine-torch.
By-and-by they heard a most awful growling close to them. 'That's a big
bear, as I live,' said old Jacob, looking all about, thinking to see one
come out from the thick bush; but Bruin was nearer to him than he thought,
for presently a great black bear burst out from the but-end of the great
burning log, and made towards Jacob; just then the wind blew the flame
outward, and it caught the bear's thick coat, and he was all in a blaze in
a moment. No doubt the heat of the fire had penetrated to the hollow of the
log, where he had lain himself snugly up for the winter, and wakened him;
but Jacob seeing the huge black brute all in a flame of fire, began to
think it was Satan's own self come to carry him off, and he roared with
fright, and the bear roared with pain and rage, and my father roared with
laughing to see Jacob's terror; but he did not let the bear laugh at him,
for he seized a thick pole that he had used for closing in the brands and
logs, and soon demolished the bear, who was so blinded with the fire and
smoke that he made no fight; and they feasted on roast bear's flesh for
many days, and got a capital skin to cover them beside."

"What, Louis, after the fur was all singed?" said Catharine.

"Kate, you are too particular," said Louis; "a story never loses, you
know."

Hector laughed heartily at the adventure, and enjoyed the dilemma of the
bear in his winter quarter; but Catharine was somewhat shocked at the
levity displayed by her cousin and brother, when recounting the terror of
old Jacob and the sufferings of the poor bear."

"You boys are always so unfeeling," she said, gravely.

"Indeed, Kate," said her brother, "the day may come when the sight of a
good piece of roast bear's flesh, will be no unwelcome sight. If we do not
find our way back to Cold Springs before the winter sets in, we may be
reduced to as bad a state as poor Jacob and my uncle were in the pine
swamps, on the banks of the St. John."

"Ah!" said Catharine, trembling, "that would be too bad to happen."

"Courage, ma belle, let us not despair for the morrow. Let us see what
to-morrow will do for us; meantime, we will not neglect the blessings we
still possess; see, our partridge is ready, let us eat our supper, and be
thankful; and for grace let us say, 'Sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof.'"

Long exposure to the air had sharpened their appetites--the hungry
wanderers needed no further invitation, the scanty meal, equally divided,
was soon despatched.

It is a common saying, but excellent to be remembered by any wanderers in
our forest wilds, that those who travel by the sun travel in a circle, and
usually find themselves at night in the same place from whence they started
in the morning; so it was with our wanderers. At sunset, they found
themselves once more in the ravine, beside the big stone, in which they had
rested at noon. They had imagined themselves miles and miles distant from
it; they were grievously disappointed. They had encouraged each other
with the confident hope that they were drawing near to the end of their
bewildering journey; they were as far from their home as ever, without the
slightest clue to guide them to the right path. Despair is not a feeling
which takes deep root in the youthful breast. The young are always
hopeful; so confident in their own wisdom and skill in averting or
conquering danger; so trusting; so willing to believe that there is a
peculiar Providence watching over them. Poor children! they had indeed need
of such a belief to strengthen their minds and encourage them to fresh
exertions, for new trials were at hand.

The broad moonlight had already flooded the recesses of the glen with
light, and all looked fresh and lovely in the dew, which glittered on
tree and leaf, on herb and flower. Catharine, who, though weary with her
fatiguing wanderings, could not sleep, left the little hut of boughs which
her companions had put up near the granite rock in the valley for her
accommodation, and ascended the western bank, where the last jutting spur
of its steep side formed a lofty clifflike promontory, at the extreme verge
of which the roots of one tall spreading oak formed a most inviting seat,
from whence the traveller looked down into a level track, which stretched
away to the edge of the lake. This flat had been the estuary of the
mountain stream, which had once rushed down between the hills, forming a
narrow gorge; but now, all was changed; the water had ceased to flow, the
granite bed was overgrown, and carpeted with deer-grass and flowers of many
hues, wild fruits and bushes, below; while majestic oaks and pines towered
above. A sea of glittering foliage lay beneath Catharine's feet; in the
distance the eye of the young girl rested on a belt of shining waters,
which girt in the shores like a silver zone; beyond, yet more remote to the
northward, stretched the illimitable forest.

Never had Catharine looked upon a scene so still or so fair to the eye; a
holy calm seemed to shed its influence over her young mind, and peaceful
tears stole down her cheeks. Not a sound was there abroad, scarcely a leaf
stirred; she could have stayed for hours there gazing on the calm beauty of
nature, and communing with her own heart, when suddenly a stirring rustling
sound caught her car; it came from a hollow channel on one side of the
promontory, which was thickly overgrown with the shrubby dogwood, wild
roses and bilberry bushes. Imagine the terror which seized the poor girl,
on perceiving a grisly beast breaking through the covert of the bushes.
With a scream and a bound, which the most deadly fear alone could have
inspired, Catharine sprung from the supporting trunk of the oak, dashed,
down the precipitous side of the ravine; now clinging to the bending sprays
of the flexile dogwood--now to some fragile birch or poplar--now trusting
to the yielding heads of the sweet-scented _ceanothus_, or filling her
hands with sharp thorns from the roses that clothed the bank; flowers,
grass, all were alike clutched at in her rapid and fearful descent. A loose
fragment of granite on which she had unwittingly placed her foot rolled
from under her; unable to regain her balance she fell forwards, and was
precipitated through the bushes into the ravine below, conscious only
of unspeakable terror and an agonising pain in one of her ancles, which
rendered her quite powerless. The noise of the stones she had dislodged in
her fall and her piteous cries, brought Louis and Hector to her side, and
they bore her in their arms to the hut of boughs and laid her down upon her
bed of leaves and grass and young pine boughs. When Catharine was able to
speak, she related to Louis and Hector the cause of her fright. She was
sure it must have been a wolf by his sharp teeth, long jaws, and grisly
coat. The last glance she had had of him had filled her with terror, he
was standing on a fallen tree with his eyes fixed upon her--she could tell
them no more that happened, she never felt the ground she was on, so great
was her fright.

Hector was half disposed to scold his sister for rambling over the hills
alone, but Louis was full of tender compassion for _la belle cousine_,
and would not suffer her to be chidden. Fortunately, no bones had been
fractured, though the sinews of her ankle were severely sprained; but the
pain was intense, and after a sleepless night, the boys found to their
grief and dismay, that Catharine was unable to put her foot to the ground.
This was an unlooked-for aggravation of their misfortunes; to pursue their
wandering was for the present impossible; rest was their only remedy,
excepting the application of such cooling medicaments as circumstances
would supply them with. Cold water constantly applied to the swollen joint,
was the first thing that was suggested; but, simple as was the lotion,
it was not easy to obtain it in sufficient quantities. They were a full
quarter of a mile from the lake shore, and the cold springs near it were
yet further off; and then the only vessel they had was the tin-pot, which
hardly contained a pint; at the same time the thirst of the fevered
sufferer was intolerable, and had also to be provided for. Poor Catharine,
what unexpected misery she now endured!

The valley and its neighbouring hills abounded in strawberries; they were
now ripening in abundance; the ground was scarlet in places with this
delicious fruit; they proved a blessed relief to the poor sufferer's
burning thirst. Hector and Louis were unwearied in supplying her with them.

Louis, ever fertile in expedients, crushed the cooling fruit and applied
them to the sprained foot; rendering the application still more grateful by
spreading them upon the large smooth leaves of the sapling oak; these he
bound on with strips of the leathery bark of the moose-wood, [Footnote:
"_Dirca palustris_,"--Moose-wood. American mezereon, leather-wood. From the
Greek, _dirka_, a fountain or wet place, its usual place of growth.] which
he had found growing in great abundance near the entrance of the ravine.
Hector, in the meantime, was not idle. After having collected a good supply
of ripe strawberries, he climbed the hills in search of birds' eggs and
small game. About noon he returned with the good news of having discovered
a spring of fine water in an adjoining ravine, beneath a clump of bass-wood
and black cherry-trees; he had also been so fortunate as to kill a
woodchuck, having met with many of their burrows in the gravelly sides of
the hills. The woodchuck seems to be a link between the rabbit and badger;
its colour is that of a leveret; it climbs like the racoon and burrows like
the rabbit; its eyes are large, full, and dark, the lip cleft, the soles of
the feet naked, claws sharp, ears short; it feeds on grasses, grain, fruit,
and berries. The flesh is white, oily, and, in the summer, rank, but is
eaten in the fall by the Indians and woodsmen; the skin is not much valued.
They are easily killed by dogs, though, being expert climbers, they often
baffle their enemies, clinging to the bark beyond their reach; a stone or
stick well-aimed soon kills them, but they often bite sharply.

The woodchuck proved a providential supply, and Hector cheered his
companions with the assurance that they could not starve, as there were
plenty of these creatures to be found. They had seen one or two about the
Cold Springs, but they are less common in the deep forest lands than on the
drier, more open plains.

"It is a great pity we have no larger vessel to bring our water from the
spring in," said Hector, looking at the tin-pot, "one is so apt to stumble
among stones and tangled underwood. If we had only one of our old bark
dishes we could get a good supply at once."

"There is a fallen birch not far from this," said Louis; "I have here
my trusty knife; what is there to hinder us from manufacturing a vessel
capable of holding water, a gallon if you like?"

"How can you sew it together, cousin?" asked Catharine; "you have neither
deer sinews, nor war-tap." [The Indian name for the flexible roots of the
_tamarack_, or swamp larch, which they make use of in manufacturing the
birch baskets and canoes.] "I have a substitute at hand, ma belle," and
Louis pointed to the strips of leatherwood that he had collected for
binding the dressings on his cousin's foot.

When an idea once struck Louis, he never rested till he worked it out in
some way. In a few minutes he was busily employed, stripping sheets of the
ever-useful birch-bark from the trunk that had fallen at the foot of the
"Wolf's Crag," for so the children had named the memorable spot where poor
Catharine's accident had occurred.

The rough outside coatings of the bark, which are of silvery whiteness, but
are ragged from exposure to the action of the weather in the larger and
older trees, he peeled off, and then cutting the bark so that the sides
lapped well over, and the corners were secured from cracks, he proceeded
to pierce holes opposite to each other, and with some trouble managed
to stitch them tightly together, by drawing strips of the moose or
leather-wood through and through. The first attempt, of course, was but
rude and ill-shaped, but it answered the purpose, and only leaked a little
at the corners for want of a sort of flap, which he had forgotten to allow
in cutting out the bark; this flap in the Indian baskets and dishes turns
up, and keeps all tight and close. The defect he remedied in his subsequent
attempts. In spite of its deficiencies, Louis's water-jar was looked upon
with great admiration, and highly commended by Catharine, who almost forgot
her sufferings--while watching her cousin's proceedings.

Louis was elated by his own successful ingenuity, and was for running off
directly to the spring. "Catharine shall now have cold water to bathe her
poor ancle with, and to quench her thirst," he said, joyfully springing
to his feet, ready for a start up the steep bank: but Hector quietly
restrained his lively cousin, by suggesting the possibility of his not
finding the "fountain in the wilderness," as Louis termed the spring, or
losing himself altogether.

"Let us both go together, then." cried Louis. Catharine cast on her cousin
an imploring glance.

"Do not leave me, dear Louis; Hector, do not let me be left alone." Her
sorrowful appeal stayed the steps of the volatile Louis.

"Go you, Hector, as you know the way: I will not leave you, Kate, since I
was the cause of all you have suffered; I will abide by you in joy or in
sorrow till I see you once more safe in your own dear mother's arms."

Comforted by this assurance, Catharine quickly dashed away the gathering
tears from her checks, and chid her own foolish fears.

"But you know, dear cousin," she said, "I am so helpless, and then the
dread of that horrible wolf makes a coward of me."

After some little time had elapsed, Hector returned; the bark vessel had
done its duty to admiration, it only wanted a very little improvement to
make it complete. The water was cold and pure. Hector had spent a little
time in deepening the mouth of the spring, and placing some stones about
it. He described the ravine as being much deeper and wider, and more
gloomy than the one they occupied. The sides and bottom were clothed with
magnificent oaks. It was a grand sight, he said, to stand on the jutting
spurs of this great ravine, and look down upon the tops of the trees that
lay below, tossing their rounded heads like the waves of a big sea. There
were many lovely flowers, vetches of several kinds, blue, white, and
pencilled, twining among the grass. A beautiful white-belled flower, that
was like the "Morning glory," (_Convolvulus major,_) and scarlet-cups
[Footnote: _Erichroma,_ or painted cup] in abundance, with roses in
profusion. The bottom of this ravine was strewed in places with huge blocks
of black granite, cushioned with thick green moss; it opened out into a
wide flat, similar to the one at the mouth of the valley of the Big Stone.
[Footnote: The mouth of this ravine is now under the plough, and waving
fields of golden grain and verdant pastures have taken place of the wild
shrubs and flowers that formerly adorned it. The lot belongs to G. Ley,
Esq.]

These children were not insensible to the beauties of nature, and both
Hector and his sister had insensibly imbibed a love of the grand and the
picturesque, by listening with untiring interest to their father's
animated and enthusiastic descriptions of his Highland home, and the wild
mountainous scenery that surrounded it. Though brought up in solitude and
uneducated, yet there was nothing vulgar or rude in the minds or manners of
these young people. Simple and untaught they were, but they were guileless,
earnest, and unsophisticated; and if they lacked the knowledge that is
learned from books, they possessed much that was useful and practical,
which had been taught by experience and observation in the school of
necessity.

For several days the pain and fever arising from her sprain rendered
any attempt at removing Catharine from the valley of the "Big Stone"
impracticable. The ripe fruit began to grow less abundant in their
immediate vicinity, and neither woodchuck, partridge, nor squirrel had been
killed; and our poor wanderers now endured the agonising pains of hunger.
Continual exposure to the air by night and by day contributed not a little
to increase the desire for food. It is true, there was the yet untried
lake, "bright, boundless, and free," gleaming in silvery splendour, but in
practice they knew nothing of the fisher's craft, though, as a matter of
report, they were well acquainted with all the mysteries of it, and had
often listened with delight to the feats performed by their respective
fathers in the art of angling, spearing and netting.

"I have heard my father say, that so bold and numerous were the fish in the
lakes and rivers he was used to fish in, that they could be taken by the
hand, with a crooked pin and coarse thread, or wooden spear; but that was
in the lower province; and oh, what glorious tales I have heard him tell of
spearing fish by torchlight!"

"The fish may be wiser or not so numerous in this lake," said Hector;
"however, if Kate can bear to be moved, we will go down to the shore and
try our luck; but what can we do? we have neither hook nor line provided."

Louis nodded his head, and sitting down on a projecting root of a scrub
oak, produced from the depths of his capacious pocket a bit of tin, which
he carefully selected from among a miscellaneous hoard of treasures.
"Here." said he, holding it up to the view as he spoke; "here is the slide
of an old powder-flask, which I picked up from among some rubbish that my
sister had thrown out the other day."

"I fear you will make nothing of that," said Hector. "a bit of bone would
be better. If you had a file now you might do something."

"Stay a moment, Monsieur Hec., what do you call this?" and Louis
triumphantly handed out of his pocket the very instrument in question, a
few inches of a broken, rusty file; very rusty, indeed, it was, but still
it might be made to answer in such ingenious hands as those of our young
French Canadian. "I well remember, Katty, how you and Mathilde laughed
at me for treasuring up this old thing months ago. Ah, Louis. Louis, you
little knew the use it was to be put to then," he added thoughtfully,
apostrophising himself; "how little do we know what is to befall us in our
young days!" "God knows it all," said Hector, gravely, "we are under His
good guidance."

"You are right, Hec., let us trust in His mercy and He will take good care
of us. Come, let us go to the lake," Catharine added, and sprung to her
feet, but as quickly sunk down upon the grass, and regarded her companions
with a piteous look, saying, "I cannot walk one step; alas, alas! what is
to become of me; I am only a useless burden to you. If you leave me here, I
shall fall a prey to some savage beast, and you cannot carry me with you in
your search for food."

"Dry your tears, sweet cousin, you shall go with us. Do you think that
Hector or Louis would abandon you in your helpless state, to die of hunger
or thirst, or to be torn by wolves or bears? We will carry you by turns;
the distance to the lake is nothing, and you are not so very heavy, ma
belle cousine; see, I could dance with you in my arms, you are so light a
burden,"--and Louis gaily caught the suffering girl up in his arms, and
with rapid steps struck into the deer path that wound through the ravine
towards the lake, but when they reached a pretty rounded knoll, (where Wolf
Tower [Footnote: See account of the "Wolf Tower," in the Appendix.] now
stands,) Louis was fain to place his cousin on a flat stone beneath a big
oak that grew beside the bank, and fling himself on the flowery ground at
her feet, while he drew a long breath, and gathered the fruit that grew
among the long grass to refresh himself after his fatigue; and then, while
resting on the "Elfin Knowe," as Catharine called the hill, he employed
himself with manufacturing a rude sort of fish-hook with the aid of
his knife, the bit of tin, and the rusty file; a bit of twine was next
produced,--boys have always a bit of string in their pockets, and Louis, as
I have before hinted, was a provident hoarder of such small matters. The
string was soon attached to the hook, and Hector was not long in cutting a
sapling that answered well the purpose of a fishing-rod, and thus equipped
they proceeded to the lake shore, Hector and Louis carrying the crippled
Catharine by turns. When there, they selected a sheltered spot beneath a
grove of over-hanging cedars and birches, festooned with wild vines, which,
closely woven, formed a natural bower, quite impervious to the rays of
the sun. A clear spring flowing from the upper part of the bank among the
hanging network of loose fibres and twisted roots, fell tinkling over a
mossy log at her feet, and quietly spread itself among the round shingly
pebbles that formed the beach of the lake. Beneath this pleasant bower
Catharine could repose, and watch her companions at their novel employment,
or bathe her feet and infirm ancle in the cool streamlet that rippled in
tiny wavelets over its stony bed.

If the amusement of fishing prove pleasant and exciting when pursued for
pastime only, it may readily be conceived that its interest must be greatly
heightened when its object is satisfying a craving degree of hunger. Among
the sunny spots on the shore, innumerable swarms of the flying grasshopper
or field crickets were sporting, and one of these proved an attractive
bait. The line was no sooner cast into the water, than the hook was seized,
and many were the brilliant specimens of sun-fish that our eager fishermen
cast at Catharine's feet, all gleaming with gold and azure scales. Nor was
there any lack of perch, or that delicate fish commonly known in these
waters as the pink roach.

Tired at last with their easy sport, the hungry boys next proceeded to the
grateful task of scaling and dressing their fish, and this they did very
expeditiously, as soon as the more difficult part, that of kindling up a
fire on the beach, had been accomplished with the help of the flint, knife,
and dried rushes. The fish were then suspended, Indian fashion, on forked
sticks stuck in the ground and inclined at a suitable angle towards the
glowing embers,--a few minutes sufficed to cook them.

"Truly," said Catharine, when the plentiful repast was set before her, "God
hath, indeed, spread a table for us here in the wilderness;" so miraculous
did this ample supply of delicious food seem in the eyes of this simple
child of nature.

They had often heard tell of the facility with which the fish could be
caught, but they had known nothing of it from their own experience, as the
streams and creeks about Cold Springs afforded them but little opportunity
for exercising their skill as anglers; so that, with the rude implements
with which they were furnished, the result of their morning success seemed
little short of divine interference in their behalf. Happy and contented
in the belief that they were not forgotten by their heavenly Father, these
poor "children in the wood" looked up with gratitude to that beneficent
Being who suffereth not even a sparrow to fall unheeded.

Upon Catharine, in particular, these things made a deep impression, and
there as she sat in the green shade, soothed by the lulling sound of the
flowing waters, and the soft murmuring of the many-coloured insects that
hovered among the fragrant leaves which thatched her sylvan bower, her
young heart was raised in humble and holy aspirations to the great Creator
of all things living. A peaceful calm diffused itself over her mind, as
with hands meekly folded across her breast, the young girl prayed with the
guileless fervour of a trusting and faithful heart.

The sun was just sinking in a flood of glory behind the dark pine-woods
at the head of the lake, when Hector and Louis, who had been carefully
providing fish for the morrow, (which was the Sabbath,) came loaded with
their finny prey carefully strung upon a willow wand, and found Catharine
sleeping in her bower. Louis was loth to break her tranquil slumbers, but
her careful brother reminded him of the danger to which she was exposed,
sleeping in the dew by the water side; "Moreover," he added, "we have some
distance to go, and we have left the precious axe and the birch-bark vessel
in the valley."

These things were too valuable to be lost, and so they roused the sleeper,
and slowly recommenced their toilsome way, following the same path that
they had made in the morning. Fortunately, Hector had taken the precaution
to bend down the flexile branches of the dogwood and break the tops of the
young trees that they had passed between on their route to the lake, and by
this clue they were enabled with tolerable certainty to retrace their way,
nothing doubting of arriving in time at the wigwam of boughs by the rock in
the valley.

Their progress was, however, slow, burdened with the care of the lame girl,
and heavily laden with the fish. The purple shades of twilight soon clouded
the scene, deepened by the heavy masses of foliage, which cast a greater
degree of obscurity upon their narrow path; for they had now left the
oak-flat and entered the gorge of the valley. The utter loneliness of the
path, the grotesque shadows of the trees, that stretched in long array
across the steep banks on either side, taking, now this, now that wild and
fanciful shape, awakened strange feelings of dread in the mind of these
poor forlorn wanderers; like most persons bred up in solitude, their
imaginations were strongly tinctured with superstitious fears. Here then,
in the lonely wilderness, far from their beloved parents and social hearth,
with no visible arm to protect them from danger, none to encourage or
to cheer them, can it be matter of surprise if they started with
terror-blanched cheeks at every fitful breeze that rustled the leaves or
waved the branches above them? The gay and lively Louis, blithe as any wild
bird in the bright sunlight, was the most easily oppressed by this strange
superstitious fear, when the shades of evening were closing round, and he
would start with ill-disguised terror at every sound or shape that met his
ear or eye, though the next minute he was the first to laugh at his own
weakness. In Hector, the feeling was of a graver, more solemn cast,
recalling to his mind all the wild and wondrous tales with which his
father was wont to entertain the children, as they crouched round the huge
log-fire of an evening. It is strange the charm these marvellous tales
possess for the youthful mind, no matter how improbable, or how often told;
year after year they will be listened to with the same ardour, with an
interest that appears to grow with repetition. And still, as they slowly
wandered along, Hector would repeat to his breathless auditors those
Highland legends that were as familiar to their ears as household words,
and still they listened with fear and wonder, and deep awe, till at each
pause he made, the deep-drawn breath and half-repressed shudder might
be heard. And now the little party paused irresolutely, fearing to
proceed,--they had omitted to notice some land-mark in their progress; the
moon had not long been up, and her light was as yet indistinct; so they sat
them down on a little grassy spot on the bank, and rested till the moon
should lighten their path.

Louis was confident they were not far from "the bigstone," but careful
Hector had his doubts, and Catharine was weary. The children had already
conceived a sort of home feeling for the valley and the mass of stone that
had sheltered them for so many nights, and soon the dark mass came in
sight, as the broad full light of the now risen moon fell upon its rugged
sides; they were nearer to it than they had imagined. "Forward for 'the big
stone' and the wigwam," cried Louis.

"Hush!" said Catharine, "look there," raising her hand with a warning
gesture.

"Where? what?"

"The wolf! the wolf!" gasped out the terrified girl. There indeed, upon the
summit of the block, in the attitude of a sentinel or watcher, stood the
gaunt-figured animal, and as she spoke, a long wild cry, the sound of which
seemed as if it came midway between the earth and the tops of the tall
pines on the lofty ridge above them, struck terror into their hearts, as
with speechless horror they gazed upon the dark outline of the terrible
beast. There it stood, with its head raised, its neck stretched outward,
and ears erect, as if to catch the echo that gave back those dismal sounds;
another minute and he was gone, and the crushing of branches and the rush
of many feet on the high bank above, was followed by the prolonged cry of
some poor fugitive animal,--a doe, or fawn, perhaps,--in the very climax
of mortal agony; and then the lonely recesses of the forest took up that
fearful death-cry, the far-off shores of the lake and the distant islands
prolonged it, and the terrified children clung together in fear and
trembling.

A few minutes over, and all was still. The chase had turned across the
hills to some distant ravine; the wolves were all gone--not even the
watcher was left, and the little valley lay once more in silence, with all
its dewy roses and sweet blossoms glittering in the moonlight; but though
around them all was peace and loveliness, it was long ere confidence was
restored to the hearts of the panic-stricken and trembling children. They
beheld a savage enemy in every mass of leafy shade, and every rustling
bough struck fresh terrors into their excited minds. They might have
exclaimed with the patriarch Jacob, "How dreadful is this place!"

With hand clasped in hand, they sat them down among the thick covert of the
bushes, for now they feared to move forward, lest the wolves should return;
sleep was long a stranger to their watchful eyes, each fearing to be the
only one left awake, and long and painful was their vigil. Yet nature,
overtasked, at length gave way, and sleep came down upon their eyelids;
deep, unbroken sleep, which lasted till the broad sunlight breaking through
the leafy curtains of their forest-bed, and the sound of waving boughs and
twittering birds, once more wakened them to life and light; recalling them
from happy dreams of home and friends, to an aching sense of loneliness and
desolation. This day they did not wander far from the valley, but took the
precaution, as evening drew on, to light a large fire, the blaze of which
they thought would keep away any beast of prey. They had no want of food,
as the fish they had caught the day before proved an ample supply. The
huckle-berries were ripening too, and soon afforded them a never-failing
source of food; there were also an abundance of bilberries, the sweet rich
berries of which proved a great treat, besides being very nourishing.




CHAPTER III.

  "Oh for a lodge in the vast wilderness,
  The boundless contiguity of shade!"

A fortnight had now passed, and Catharine still suffered so much from pain
and fever, that they were unable to continue their wanderings; all that
Hector and his cousin could do, was to carry her to the bower by the lake,
where she reclined whilst they caught fish. The painful longing to regain
their lost home had lost nothing of its intensity; and often would the poor
sufferer start from her bed of leaves and boughs, to wring her hands and
weep, and call in piteous tones upon that dear father and mother, who would
have given worlds had they been at their command, to have heard but one
accent of her beloved voice, to have felt one loving pressure from that
fevered hand. Hope, the consoler, hovered over the path of the young
wanderers, long after she had ceased to whisper comfort to the desolate
hearts of the mournful parents.

Of all that suffered by this sad calamity, no one was more to be pitied
than Louis Perron: deeply did the poor boy lament the thoughtless folly
which had involved his cousin Catharine in so terrible a misfortune. "If
Kate had not been with me," he would say, "we should not have been lost;
for Hector is so cautious and so careful, he would not have left the
cattle-path; but we were so heedless, we thought only of flowers and
insects, of birds, and such trifles, and paid no heed to our way." Louis
Perron, such is life. The young press gaily onward, gathering the flowers,
and following the gay butterflies that attract them in the form of pleasure
and amusement; they forget the grave counsels of the thoughtful, till they
find the path they have followed is beset with briers and thorns; and a
thousand painful difficulties that were unseen, unexpected, overwhelm and
bring them to a sad sense of their own folly; and perhaps the punishment of
their errors does not fall upon themselves alone, but upon the innocent,
who have unknowingly been made participators in their fault.

By the kindest and tenderest attention to all her comforts, Louis
endeavoured to alleviate his cousin's sufferings, and soften her regrets;
nay, he would often speak cheerfully and even gaily to her, when his own
heart was heavy, and his eyes ready to overflow with tears. "If it were
not for our dear parents and the dear children at home," he would say, "we
might spend our time most happily upon these charming plains; it is much
more delightful here than in the dark thick woods; see how brightly the
sunbeams come down and gladden the ground, and cover the earth with fruit
and flowers. It is pleasant to be able to fish and hunt, and trap the game.
Yes, if they were all here, we would build us a nice log-house, and clear
up these bushes on the flat near the lake. This 'Elfin Knowe,' as you call
it, Kate, would be a nice spot to build upon. See these glorious old oaks;
not one should be cut down, and we would have a boat and a canoe, and
voyage across to yonder islands. Would it not be charming, ma belle?" and
Catharine, smiling at the picture drawn so eloquently, would enter into the
spirit of the project, and say,--

"Ah! Louis, that would be pleasant."

"If we had but my father's rifle now," said Hector, "and old Wolfe."

"Yes, and Fanchette, dear little Fanchette, that trees the partridges and
black squirrels," said Louis.

"I saw a doe and a half-grown fawn beside her this very morning, at break
of day," said Hector. "The fawn was so little fearful, that if I had had a
stick in my hand, I could have killed it.--I came within ten yards of the
spot where it stood. I know it would be easy to catch one by making a
dead-fall." [A sort of trap in which game is taken in the woods, or on the
banks of creeks.]

"If we had but a dear fawn to frolic about us, like Mignon, dear innocent
Mignon," cried Catharine, "I should never feel lonely then."

"And we should never want for meat, if we could catch a fine fawn from time
to time, ma belle."

"Hec., what are you thinking of?"

"I was thinking, Louis, that If we were doomed to remain here all our
lives, we must build a house for ourselves; we could not live in the open
air without shelter as we have done. The summer will soon pass, and the
rainy season will come, and the bitter frosts and snows of winter will have
to be provided against."

"But, Hector, do you really think there is no chance of finding our way
back to Cold Springs? We know it must be behind this lake," said Louis.

"True, but whether east, west, or south, we cannot tell; and whichever way
we take now is but a chance, and if once we leave the lake and get involved
in the mazes of that dark forest, we should perish, for we know there is
neither water nor berries, nor game to be had as there is here, and we
might be soon starved to death. God was good who led us beside this fine
lake, and upon these fruitful plains."

"It is a good thing that I had my axe when we started from home," said
Hector. "We should not have been so well off without it; we shall find the
use of it if we have to build a house. We must look out for some spot where
there is a spring of good water, and--"

"No horrible wolves," interrupted Catharine: "though I love this pretty
ravine, and the banks and braes about us, I do not think I shall like to
stay here. I heard the wolves only last night, when you and Louis were
asleep."

"We must not forget to keep watch-fires."

"What shall we do for clothes?" said Catharine, glancing at her home-spun
frock of wool and cotton plaid.

"A weighty consideration, indeed," sighed Hector; "clothes must be provided
before ours are worn out, and the winter comes on."

"We must save all the skins of the wood-chucks and squirrels," suggested
Louis; "and fawns when we catch them."

"Yes, and fawns when we get them," added Hector; "but it is time enough to
think of all these things; we must not give up all hope of home."

"I give up all hope? I shall hope on while I have life," said Catharine.
"My dear, dear father, he will never forget his lost children; he will try
and find us, alive or dead; he will never give up the search."

Poor child, how long did this hope burn like a living torch in thy
guileless breast. How often, as they roamed those hills and valleys, were
thine eyes sent into the gloomy recesses of the dark ravines and thick
bushes, with the hope that they would meet the advancing form and
outstretched arms of thy earthly parents: all in vain--yet the arms of thy
heavenly Father were extended over thee, to guide, to guard, and to sustain
thee.

How often were Catharine's hands filled with wild-flowers, to carry home,
as she fondly said, to sick Louise, or her mother. Poor Catharine, how
often did your bouquets fade; how often did the sad exile water them with
her tears,--for hers was the hope that keeps alive despair.

When they roused them in the morning to recommence their fruitless
wanderings, they would say to each other: "Perhaps we shall see our father,
he may find us here to-day;" but evening came, and still he came not, and
they were no nearer to their father's home than they had been the day
previous.

"If we could but find our way back to the 'Cold Creek,' we might, by
following its course, return to Cold Springs," said Hector.

"I doubt much the fact of the 'Cold Creek' having any connexion with our
Spring," said Louis; "I think it has its rise in the 'Beaver-meadow,' and
following its course would only entangle us among those wolfish balsam and
cedar swamps, or lead us yet further astray into the thick recesses of the
pine forest. For my part, I believe we are already fifty miles from Cold
Springs."

It is one of the bewildering mistakes that all persons who lose their way
in the pathless woods fall into, they have no idea of distance, or the
points of the compass, unless they can see the sun rise and set, which is
not possible to do when surrounded by the dense growth of forest-trees;
they rather measure distance by the time they have been wandering, than by
any other token.

The children knew that they had been a long time absent from home,
wandering hither and thither, and they fancied their journey had been as
long as it had been weary. They had indeed the comfort of seeing the sun in
his course from east to west, but they knew not in what direction the home
they had lost lay; it was this that troubled them in their choice of the
course they should take each day, and at last determined them to lose no
more time so fruitlessly, where the peril was so great, but seek for some
pleasant spot where they might pass their time in safety, and provide for
their present and future wants.

  "The world was all before them, where to choose
  Their place of rest, and Providence their guide."

Catharine declared her ancle was so much stronger than it had been since
the accident, and her health so much amended, that the day after the
conversation just recorded, the little party bade farewell to the valley
of the "big stone," and ascending the steep sides of the hills, bent their
steps eastward, keeping the lake to their left hand; Hector led the way,
loaded with their household utensils, which consisted only of the axe, which
he would trust to no one but himself, the tin-pot, and the birch-basket.
Louis had his cousin to assist up the steep banks, likewise some fish to
carry, which had been caught early in the morning.

The wanderers thought at first to explore the ground near the lake shore,
but soon abandoned this resolution, on finding the under-growth of trees
and bushes become so thick, that they made little progress, and the fatigue
of travelling was greatly increased by having continually to put aside the
bushes or bend them down.

Hector advised trying the higher ground: and after following a deer-path
through a small ravine that crossed the hills, they found themselves on a
fine extent of table-land, richly, but not too densely wooded with white
and black oaks, diversified with here and there a solitary pine, which
reared its straight and pillar-like trunk in stately grandeur above its
leafy companions: a meet eyrie for the bald-eagle, that kept watch from its
dark crest over the silent waters of the lake, spread below like a silver
zone studded with emeralds.

In their progress, they passed the head of many small ravines, which
divided the hilly shores of the lake into deep furrows; these furrows had
once been channels, by which the waters of some upper lake (the site of
which is now dry land) had at a former period poured down into the valley,
filling the basin of what now is called the Rice Lake. These waters with
resistless course had ploughed their way between the hills, bearing in
their course those blocks of granite and limestone which are so widely
scattered both on the hill-tops and the plains, or form a rocky pavement at
the bottom of the narrow denies. What a sight of sublime desolation must
that outpouring of the waters have presented, when those steep banks were
riven by the sweeping torrents that were loosened from their former bounds.
The pleased eye rests upon these tranquil shores, now covered with oaks and
pines, or waving with a flood of golden grain, or varied by neat dwellings
and fruitful gardens; and the gazer on that peaceful scene scarcely
pictures to himself what it must have been when no living eye was there to
mark the rushing floods, when they scooped to themselves the deep bed in
which they now repose.

Those lovely islands that sit like stately crowns upon the waters, were
doubtless the wreck that remained of the valley; elevated spots, whose
rocky basis withstood the force of the rushing waters, that carried away
the lighter portions of the soil. The southern shore, seen from the lake,
seems to lie in regular ridges running from south to north; some few are
parallel with the lake-shore, possibly where some surmountable impediment
turned the current the subsiding waters; but they all find an outlet
through their connexion with ravines communicating with the lake.

There is a beautiful level tract of land, with only here and there a
solitary oak growing upon it, or a few stately pines; it is commonly
called the "upper Race-course," merely on account of the smoothness of the
surface; it forms a high tableland, nearly three hundred feet above the
lake, and is surrounded by high hills. This spot, though now dry and
covered with turf and flowers, and low bushes, has evidently once been
a broad sheet of water. To the eastward lies a still more lovely and
attractive spot, known as the "lower Race-course;" it lies on a lower level
than the former one, and, like it, is embanked by a ridge of distant hills;
both have ravines leading down to the Rice Lake, and may have been the
sources from whence its channel was filled. Some convulsion of nature at a
remote period, by raising the waters above their natural level, might have
caused a disruption of the banks, and drained their beds, as they now
appear ready for the ploughshare or the spade. In the month of June these
flats are brilliant with the splendid blossoms of the _enchroma_, or
painted cup, the azure lupine and snowy _trillium_ roses scent the evening
air, and grow as if planted by the hand of taste.

A carpeting of the small downy saxifrage [Footnote: Saxifraga nivalis.] with
its white silky leaves covers the ground in early spring. In the fall, it
is red with the bright berries and dark box-shaped leaves of a species of
creeping winter-green, that the Indians call spiceberry; the leaves are
highly aromatic, and it is medicinal as well as agreeable to the taste and
smell. In the month of July a gorgeous assemblage of martagon lilies take
the place of the lupine and trilliums; these splendid lilies vary from
orange to the brightest scarlet; various species of sunflowers and
_coreopsis_ next appear, and elegant white _pyrolas_ [Footnote: Gentiana
linearis, G. crenata.] scent the air and charm the eye. The delicate lilac
and white shrubby asters next appear, and these are followed by the large
deep blue gentian, and here and there by the elegant fringed gentian.
[Footnote: Pyrola rotundifolia, P. asarifolia.] These are the latest and
loveliest of the flowers that adorn this tract of land. It is indeed a
garden of nature's own planting, but the wild garden is being converted
into fields of grain, and the wild flowers give place to a new race of
vegetables, less ornamental, but more useful to man and the races of
domestic animals that depend upon him for their support.

Our travellers, after wandering over this lovely plain, found themselves,
at the close of the day, at the head of a fine ravine, [Footnote:
_Pedophyllnm galmata_,--Mandrake, or May-apple.] where they had the good
fortune to perceive a spring of pure water, oozing beneath some large
moss-covered blocks of black waterworn granite; the ground was thickly
covered with moss about the edges of the spring, and many varieties of
flowering shrubs and fruits were scattered along the valley and up the
steep sides of the surrounding hills. There were whortleberries, or
huckleberries, as they are more usually called, in abundance; bilberries
dead ripe, and falling from the bushes at a touch. The vines that wreathed
the low bushes and climbed the trees were loaded with clusters of grapes,
but these were yet hard and green; dwarf filberts grew on the dry gravelly
sides of the hills, yet the rough prickly calyx that enclosed the nut,
filled their fingers with minute thorns, that irritated the skin like the
stings of the nettle; but as the kernel when ripe was sweet and good, they
did not mind the consequences. The moist part of the valley was occupied
by a large bed of May-apples, [Footnote: Kilvert's Ravine, above Pine-tree
Point.] the fruit of which was of unusual size, but they were not ripe,
August being the month when they ripen; there were also wild plums still
green, and wild cherries and blackberries ripening; there were great
numbers of the woodchucks' burrows on the hills, while partridges and
quails were seen under the thick covert of the blue-berried dog-wood,
[Footnote: _Cornus sericea_. The blue berries of this shrub are eaten by
the partridge and wild-ducks; also by the pigeons and other birds. There
are several species of this shrub common to the Rice Lake.] that here grew
in abundance at the mouth of the ravine where it opened to the lake. As
this spot offered many advantages, our travellers halted for the night, and
resolved to make it their head-quarters for a season, till they should meet
with an eligible situation for building a winter shelter.

Here, then, at the head of the valley, sheltered by one of the rounded
hills that formed its sides, our young people erected a summer hut,
somewhat after the fashion of an Indian wigwam, which was all the shelter
that was requisite while the weather remained so warm. Through the opening
at the gorge of this ravine they enjoyed a peep at the distant waters of
the lake which terminated the vista, while they were quite removed from its
unwholesome vapours.

The temperature of the air for some days had been hot and sultry, scarcely
modified by the cool delicious breeze that usually sets in about nine
o'clock, and blows most refreshingly till four or five in the afternoon.
Hector and Louis had gone down to fish for supper, while Catharine busied
herself in collecting leaves and dried deer-grass, moss and fern, of which
there was abundance near the spring. The boys had promised to cut some
fresh cedar boughs near the lake shore, and bring them up to form a
foundation for their bed, and also to strew Indian-fashion over the floor
of the hut by way of a carpet. This sort of carpeting reminds one of, the
times when the palaces of our English kings were strewed with rushes, and
brings to mind the old song:--

  "Oh! the golden days of good Queen Bess,
  When the floors were strew'd with rushes,
  And the doors went on the latch----"

Despise not then, you, my refined young readers, the rude expedients
adopted by these simple children of the forest, who knew nothing of the
luxuries that were to be met with in the houses of the great and the rich.
The fragrant carpet of cedar or hemlock-spruce sprigs strewn lightly over
the earthen floor, was to them a luxury as great as if it had been taken
from the looms of Persia or Turkey, so happy and contented were they in
their ignorance. Their bed of freshly gathered grass and leaves, raised
from the earth by a heap of branches carefully arranged, was to them as
pleasant as beds of down, and the rude hut of bark and poles, as curtains
of silk or damask.

Having collected as much of these materials as she deemed sufficient for
the purpose, Catharine next gathered up dry oak branches, plenty of which
lay scattered here and there, to make a watch-fire for the night, and this
done, weary and warm, she sat down on a little hillock, beneath the cooling
shade of a grove of young aspens, that grew near the hut; pleased with the
dancing of the leaves, which fluttered above her head, and fanned her warm
cheek with their incessant motion, she thought, like her cousin Louise,
that the aspen was the merriest tree in the forest, for it was always
dancing, dancing, dancing, even when all the rest were still.

She watched the gathering of the distant thunder-clouds, which cast a
deeper, more sombre shade upon the pines that girded the northern shores of
the lake as with an ebon frame. Insensibly her thoughts wandered far away
from the lonely spot whereon she sat, to the stoup [Footnote: The Dutch
word for verandah, which is still in common use among the Canadians.] in
front of her father's house, and in memory's eye she beheld it all exactly
as she had left it. There stood the big spinning wheel, just as she had set
it aside; the hanks of dyed yarn suspended from the rafters, the basket
filled with the carded wool ready for her work. She saw in fancy her
father, with his fine athletic upright figure, his sunburnt cheeks and
clustering sable hair, his clear energetic hazel eye ever beaming upon her,
his favourite child, with looks of love and kindness as she moved to and
fro at her wheel. [Footnote: Such is the method of working at the large
wool wheel, unknown or obsolete in England.] There, too, was her mother,
with her light step and sweet cheerful voice, singing as she pursued her
daily avocations; and Donald and Kenneth driving up the cows to be milked,
or chopping firewood. And as these images, like the figures of the magic
lantern, passed in all their living colours before her mental vision, her
head drooped heavier and lower till it sunk upon her arm, and then she
started, looked round, and slept again, her face deeply buried in her young
bosom; and long and peacefully the young girl slumbered.

A sound of hurrying feet approaches, a wild cry is heard and panting
breath, and the sleeper with a startling scream sprang to her feet: she
dreamed that she was struggling in the fangs of a wolf--its grisly paws
were clasped about her throat; the feeling was agony and suffocation--her
languid eyes open. Can it be?--what is it that she sees? Yes, it is Wolfe;
not the fierce creature of her dreams by night and her fears by day, but
her father's own brave devoted dog. What joy, what hope rushed to her
heart! She threw herself upon the shaggy neck of the faithful beast, and
wept from the fulness of heart.

"Yes," she joyfully cried, "I knew that I should see him again. My own
dear, dear, loving father! Father! father! dear, dear father, here are your
children. Come, come quickly!" and she hurried to the head of the valley,
raising her voice, that the beloved parent, who she now confidently
believed was approaching, might be guided to the spot by the well-known
sound of her voice.

Poor, child! the echoes of thy eager voice, prolonged by every projecting
headland of the valley, replied in mocking tones, "Come quickly!"

Bewildered she paused, listened breathlessly and again she called,
"Father, come quickly, come!" and again the deceitful sounds were repeated,
"Quickly come!"

The faithful dog, who had succeeded in tracking the steps of his lost
mistress, raised his head and erected his ears, as she called on her
father's name; but he gave no joyful bark of recognition as he was wont to
do when he heard his master's step approaching. Still Catharine could not
but think that Wolfe had only hurried on before, and that her father must
be very near.

The sound of her voice had been heard by her brother and cousin, who,
fearing some evil beast had made its way to the wigwam, hastily wound up
their line, and left the fishing-ground to hurry to her assistance. They
could hardly believe their eyes when they saw Wolfe, faithful old Wolfe,
their earliest friend and playfellow, named by their father after the
gallant hero of Quebec. And they too, like Catharine, thought that their
friends were not far distant, and joyfully they climbed the hills and
shouted aloud, and Wolfe was coaxed and caressed, and besought to follow
them to point out the way they should take: but all their entreaties were
in vain; worn out with fatigue and long fasting, the poor old dog refused
to quit the embers of the fire, before which he stretched himself, and
the boys now noticed his gaunt frame and wasted flesh--he looked almost
starved. The fact now became evident that he was in a state of great
exhaustion. Catharine thought he eyed the spring with wishful looks, and
she soon supplied him with water in the bark dish, to this great relief.

Wolfe had been out for several days with his master, who would repeat, in
tones of sad earnestness, to the faithful creature, "Lost, lost, lost!" It
was his custom to do so when the cattle strayed, and Wolfe would travel in
all directions till he found them, nor ceased his search till he discovered
the objects he was ordered to bring home. The last night of the father's
wanderings, when, sick and hopeless, he came back to his melancholy
home, as he sat sleeplessly rocking himself to and fro, he involuntarily
exclaimed, wringing his hands, "Lost, lost, lost!" Wolfe heard what to him
was an imperative command; he rose, and stood at the door, and whined;
mechanically his master rose, lifted the latch, and again exclaimed in
passionate tones those magic words, that sent the faithful messenger forth
into the dark forest path. Once on the trail he never left it, but with ah
instinct incomprehensible as it was powerful, he continued to track the
woods, lingering long on spots where the wanderers had left any signs of
their sojourn; he had for some time been baffled at the Beaver Meadow, and
again where they had crossed Cold Creek, but had regained the scent and
traced them to the valley of the "big stone," and then with the sagacity of
the bloodhound and the affection of the terrier he had, at last, discovered
the objects of his unwearied, though often baffled search.

What a state of excitement did the unexpected arrival of old Wolfe create!
How many questions were put to the poor beast, as he lay with his head
pillowed on the knees of his loving mistress! Catharine knew it was
foolish, but she could not help talking to the dumb animal, as if he had
been conversant with her own language. Ah, old Wolfe, if your homesick
nurse could but have interpreted those expressive looks, those eloquent
waggings of your bushy tail, as it flapped upon the grass, or waved from
side to side; those gentle lickings of the hand, and mute sorrowful
glances, as though he would have said, "Dear mistress, I know all your
troubles. I know all you say, but I cannot answer you!" There is something
touching in the silent sympathy of the dog, to which only the hard-hearted
and depraved can be quite insensible. I remember once hearing of a felon,
who had shown the greatest obstinacy and callous indifference to the
appeals of his relations, and the clergyman that attended him in prison,
whose heart was softened by the sight of a little dog, that had been his
companion in his days of comparative innocence, forcing its way through the
crowd, till it gained the foot of the gallows; its mute look of anguish
and affection unlocked the fount of human feeling, and the condemned man
wept--perhaps the first tears he had shed since childhood's happy days.

The night closed in with a tempest of almost tropical violence. The inky
darkness of the sky was relieved, at intervals, by sheets of lurid flame,
which revealed, by its intense brightness, every object far off or near.
The distant lake, just seen amid the screen of leaves through the gorge of
the valley, gleamed like a sea of molten sulphur; the deep narrow defile,
shut in by the steep and wooded hills, looked deeper, more wild and gloomy,
when revealed by that vivid glare of light.

There was no stir among the trees, the heavy rounded masses of foliage
remained unmoved; the very aspen, that tremulous sensitive tree, scarcely
stirred; it seemed as if the very pulses of nature were at rest. The solemn
murmur that preceded the thunder-peal might have been likened to the
moaning of the dying. The children felt the loneliness of the spot. Seated
at the entrance of their sylvan hut, in front of which their evening fire
burned brightly, they looked out upon the storm in silence and in
awe. Screened by the sheltering shrubs that grew near them, they felt
comparatively safe from the dangers of the storm, which now burst in
terrific violence above the valley. Cloud answered to cloud, and the echoes
of the hills prolonged the sound, while shattered trunks and brittle
branches filled the air, and shrieked and groaned in that wild war of
elements.

Between the pauses of the tempest the long howl of the wolves, from their
covert in some distant cedar swamp at the edge of the lake, might be heard
from time to time,--a sound that always thrilled their hearts with fear. To
the mighty thunder-peal that burst above their heads they listened with awe
and wonder. It seemed, indeed, to them as if it were the voice of Him who
"sendeth out his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice." And they bowed and
adored his majesty; but they shrank with curdled blood from the cry of the
_felon wolf._

And now the storm was at its climax, and the hail and rain came down in a
whitening flood upon that ocean of forest leaves; the old grey branches
were lifted up and down, and the stout trunks rent, for they would not bow
down before the fury of the whirlwind, and were scattered all abroad like
chaff before the wind.

The children thought not of danger for themselves, but they feared for the
safety of their fathers, whom they believed to be not far off from them.
And often 'mid the raging of the elements, they fancied they could
distinguish familiar voices calling upon their names. "If our father had
not been near, Wolfe would not have come hither."

"Ah, if our father should have perished in this fearful storm," said
Catharine, weeping, "or have been starved to death while seeking for us!"
and Catharine covered her face and wept more bitterly.

But Louis would not listen to such melancholy forebodings. Their fathers
were both brave hardy men, accustomed to every sort of danger and
privation; they were able to take care of themselves. Yes, he was sure they
were not far off; it was this unlucky storm coming on that had prevented
them from meeting.

"To-morrow, ma chere, will be a glorious day after the storm; it will be a
joyful one too, we shall go out with Wolfe, and he will find his master,
and then--oh, yes! I dare say my dear father will be with yours. They will
have taken good heed to the track, and we shall soon see our dear mothers
and chere petite Louise."

The storm lasted till past midnight, when it gradually subsided, and the
poor wanderers glad to see the murky clouds roll off, and the stars peep
forth among their broken masses; but they were reduced to a pitiful state,
the hurricane having beaten down their little hut, and their garments were
drenched with rain. However, the boys made a good fire with some bark
and boughs they had in store; there were a few sparks in their back log
unextinguished, and this they gladly fanned up into a blaze, with which
they dried their wet clothes, and warmed themselves. The air was now cool
almost to chilliness, and for some days the weather remained unsettled,
and the sky overcast with clouds, while the lake presented a leaden hue,
crested with white mimic waves.

They soon set to work to make another hut, and found close to the head of
the ravine a great pine uprooted, affording them large pieces of bark,
which proved very serviceable in thatching the sides of the hut. The boys
employed themselves in this work, while Catharine cooked the fish they
had caught the night before, with a share of which old Wolfe seemed to be
mightily well pleased. After they had breakfasted, they all went up towards
the high table-land above the ravine, with Wolfe, to look round in hope of
getting sight of their friends from Cold Springs, but though they kept an
anxious look out in every direction, they returned, towards evening,
tired and hopeless. Hector had killed a red squirrel, and a partridge which
Wolfe "treed,"--that is, stood barking at the foot of the tree in which it
had perched,--and the supply of meat was a seasonable change. They also
noticed, and marked, with the axe, several trees where there were bees,
intending to come in the cold weather, and cut them down. Louis's father
was a great and successful bee-hunter; and Louis rather prided himself on
having learned something of his father's skill in that line. Here, where
flowers were so abundant and water plentiful, the wild bees seemed to be
abundant also; besides, the open space between the trees, admitting the
warm sunbeam freely, was favourable both for the bees and the flowers on
which they fed, and Louis talked joyfully of the fine stores of honey they
should collect in the fell. He had taught little Fanchon, a small French
spaniel of his father's, to find out the trees where the bees hived, and
also the nests of the ground-bees, and she would bark at the foot of the
tree, or scratch with her feet on the ground, as the other dogs barked at
the squirrels or the woodchucks; but Fanchon was far away, and Wolfe was
old, and would learn no new tricks, so Louis knew he had nothing but his
own observation and the axe to depend upon for procuring honey.

The boys had been unsuccessful for some days past in fishing; neither
perch nor sunfish, pink roach nor mud-pouts [Footnote: All these fish are
indigenous to the fresh waters of Canada.] were to be caught. However, they
found water-mussels by groping in the sand, and cray-fish among the
gravel at the edge of the water only; the last pinched their fingers very
spitefully. The mussels were not very palateable, for want of salt; but
hungry folks must not be dainty, and Louis declared them very good when
well roasted, covered up with hot embers. "The fish-hawks," said he, "set
us a good example, for they eat them, and so do the eagles and herons. I
watched one the other day with a mussel in his bill; he flew to a high
tree, let his prey fall, and immediately darted down to secure it; but I
drove him off, and, to my great amusement, perceived the wise fellow had
just let it fall on a stone, which had cracked the shell for him just in
the right place. I often see shells lying at the foot of trees, far up
the hills, where these birds must have left them. There is one large
thick-shelled mussel, that I have found several times with a round hole
drilled through the shell, just as if it had been done with a small auger,
doubtless the work of some bird with a strong beak."

"Do you remember," said Catharine, "the fine pink mussel-shell that Hec.
picked up in the little corn-field last year; it had a hole in one of
the shells too; [Footnote: This ingenious mode of cracking the shells of
mussels is common to many birds. The crow (_Corvus corone_) has been long
known by American naturalists to break the thick shells of the river
mussels, by letting them fall from a height on to rocks and stones.] and
when my uncle saw it, he said it must have been dropped by some large bird,
a fish-hawk possibly, or a heron, and brought from the great lake, as it
had been taken out of some deep water, the mussels in our creeks being
quite thin-shelled and white."

"Do you remember what a quantity of large fish bones we found in the
eagle's nest on the top of our hill, Louis?" said Hector.

"I do; those fish must have been larger than our perch and sun-fish; they
were brought from this very lake, I dare say."

"If we had a good canoe now, or a boat, and a strong hook and line, we
might become great fishermen."

"Louis," said Catharine, "is always thinking about canoes, and boats, and
skiffs; he ought to have been a sailor."

Louis was confident that if they had a canoe he could soon learn to
manage her; he was an excellent sailor already in theory. Louis never saw
difficulties; he was always hopeful, and had a very good opinion of his own
cleverness; he was quicker in most things, his ideas flowed faster than
Hector's, but Hector was more prudent, and possessed one valuable quality--
steady perseverance; he was slow in adopting an opinion, but when once
convinced, he pushed on steadily till he mastered the subject or overcame
the obstacle.

"Catharine," said Louis, one day, "the huckleberries age now very
plentiful, and I think it would be a wise thing to gather a good store of
them, and dry them for the winter. See, ma chere, wherever we turn our
eyes, or place our feet, they are to be found; the hill sides are purple
with them. We may, for aught we know, be obliged to pass the rest of our
lives here; it will be well to prepare for the winter when no berries are
to be found."

"It will be well, mon ami, but we must not dry them in the sun; for let me
tell you, Mr. Louis, that they will be quite tasteless--mere dry husks."

"Why so, ma belle?"

"I do not know the reason, but I only know the fact, for when our mothers
dried the currants and raspberries in the sun, such was the case, but when
they dried them on the oven floor, or on the hearth, they were quite nice."

"Well, Cath., I think I know of a flat thin stone that will make a good
hearthstone, and we can get sheets of birch bark and sew into flat bags, to
keep the dried fruit in."

They now turned all their attention to drying huckleberries (or
whortleberries). [Footnote: From the abundance of this fruit, the Indians
have given the name of Whortleberry Plain to the lands on the south shore.
During the month of July and the early part of August, large parties come
to the Rice Lake Plains to gather huckleberries, which they preserve by
drying, for winter use. These berries make a delicious tart or pudding,
mixed with bilberries and red-currants, requiring little sugar.] Catharine
and Louis (who fancied nothing could be contrived without his help)
attended to the preparing and making of the bags of birch bark; but Hector
was soon tired of girl's work, as he termed it, and, after gathering some
berries, would wander away over the hills in search of game, and to explore
the neighbouring hills and valleys, and sometimes it was sunset before he
made his appearance. Hector had made an excellent strong-bow, like the
Indian bow, out of a tough piece of hickory wood, which he found in one of
his rambles, and he made arrows with wood that he seasoned in the smoke,
sharpening the heads with great care with his knife, and hardening them by
exposure to strong heat, at a certain distance from the fire. The entrails
of the woodchucks, stretched, and scraped and dried, and rendered pliable
by rubbing and drawing through the hands, answered for a bowstring; but
afterwards, when they got the sinews and hide of the deer, they used them,
properly dressed for the purpose.

Hector also made a cross-bow, which he used with great effect, being a
true and steady marksman. Louis and he would often amuse themselves with
shooting at a mark, which they would chip on the bark of a tree; even
Catharine was a tolerable archeress with the longbow, and the hut was now
seldom without game of one kind or other. Hector seldom returned from his
rambles without partridges, quails, or young pigeons, which are plentiful
at this season of the year; many of the old ones that pass over in their
migratory flight in the spring, stay to breed, or return thither for the
acorns and berries that are to be found in great abundance. Squirrels, too,
are very plentiful at this season. Hector and Louis remarked that the red
and black squirrels never were to be found very near each other. It is a
common belief, that the red squirrels make common cause with the grey, and
beat the larger enemy off the ground. The black squirrel, for a succession
of years, was very rarely to be met with on the Plains, while there were
plenty of the red and grey in the "oak openings." [Footnote: Within the
last three years, however, the black squirrels have been very numerous, and
the red are less frequently to be seen. The flesh of the black squirrel is
tender, white, and delicate, like that of a young rabbit.] Deer, at the
time our young Crusoes were living on the Rice Lake Plains, were plentiful,
and, of course, so were those beasts that prey upon them,--wolves, bears,
and wolverines, besides the Canadian lynx, or catamount, as it is here
commonly called, a species of wild-cat or panther. These wild animals are
now no longer to be seen; it is a rare thing to hear of bears or wolves,
and the wolverine and lynx are known only as matters of history in this
part of the country; these animals disappear as civilization advances,
while some others increase and follow man, especially many species of
birds, which seem to pick up the crumbs that fall from the rich man's
board, and multiply about his dwelling; some adopt new habits and modes of
building and feeding, according to the alteration and improvement in their
circumstances.

While our young people seldom wanted for meat, they felt the privation of
the tread to which they had teen accustomed very sensibly. One day, while
Hector and Louis were busily engaged with their assistant, Wolfe, in
unearthing a woodchuck, that had taken refuge in his burrow, on one of the
gravelly hills above the lake, Catharine amused herself by looking
for flowers; she had filled her lap with ripe May-apples, [Footnote:
_Podophyllum peltatum_-May-apple, or Mandrake. The fruit of the May-apple,
in rich moist soil, will attain to the size of the magnum bonum, or
egg-plum, which it resembles in colour and shape. It makes a delicious
preserve, if seasoned with cloves or ginger; when eaten uncooked, the outer
rind, which is thick and fleshy, and has a rank taste, should be thrown
aside; the fine acid pulp in which the seeds are imbedded alone should be
eaten. The root of the Podophyllum is used as a cathartic by the Indians.
The root of this plant is reticulated, and when a large body of them are
uncovered, they present a singular appearance, interlacing each other in
large meshes, like an extensive net-work; these roots are white, as thick
as a man's little finger, and fragrant, and spread horizontally along
the surface. The blossom is like a small white rose.] but finding them
cumbersome in climbing the steep wooded hills, she deposited them at the
foot of a tree near the boys, and pursued her search; and it was not long
before she perceived some pretty grassy-looking plants, with heads of
bright lilac flowers, and on plucking some pulled up the root also. The
root was about the size and shape of a large crocus, and, on biting it, she
found it far from disagreeable, sweet, and slightly astringent; it seemed
to be a favourite root with the wood-chucks, for she noticed that it grew
about their burrows on dry gravelly soil, and many of the stems were
bitten, and the roots eaten, a warrant in full of wholesomeness. Therefore,
carrying home a parcel of the largest of the roots, she roasted them in the
embers, and they proved almost as good as chestnuts, and more satisfying
than the acorns of the white oak, which they had often roasted in the fire,
when they were out working on the fallow, at the log heaps. Hector and
Louis ate heartily of the roots, and commended Catharine for the discovery.
Not many days afterwards, Louis accidentally found a much larger and more
valuable root, near the lake shore. He saw a fine climbing shrub, with
close bunches of dark reddish-purple pea-shaped flowers, which scented the
air with a delicious perfume. The plant climbed to a great height over the
young trees, with a profusion of dark green leaves and tendrils. Pleased
with the bowery appearance of the plant, he tried to pull one up, that he
might show it to his cousin, when the root displayed a number of large
tubers, as big as good-sized potatoes, regular oval-shaped; the inside was
quite white, tasting somewhat like a potato, only pleasanter, when in its
raw state, than an uncooked potato. Louis gathered his pockets full, and
hastened home with his prize, and, on being roasted, these new roots were
decided to be little inferior to potatoes, at all events, they were a
valuable addition to their slender stores, and they procured as many as
they could find, carefully storing them in a hole, which they dug for that
purpose in a corner of their hut. [Footnote: This plant appears to me to
be a species of the _Psoralea esculenta_, or Indian bread-root, which it
resembles in description, excepting that the root of the above is tuberous
oval, and connected by long filaments. The largest tubers are farthest from
the stem of the plant.] Hector suggested that these roots would be far
better late in the fall, or early in the spring, than during the time that
the plant was in bloom, for he knew from observation and experience that at
the flowering season the greater part of the nourishment derived from the
soil goes to perfect the flower and the seeds. Upon scraping the cut tuber,
there was a white floury powder produced resembling the starchy substance
of the potato.

"This flour," said Catharine, "would make good porridge with milk."

"Excellent, no doubt, my wise little cook and housekeeper," said Louis,
laughing, "but ma belle cousine, where is the milk, and where is the
porridge-pot to come from?"

"Indeed," said Catharine, "I fear, Louis, we must wait long for both."

One fine day, Louis returned home from the lake shore in great haste, for
the bows and arrows, with the interesting news that a herd of five deer
were in the water, and making for Long Island.

"But, Louis, they will be gone out of sight and beyond the reach of the
arrows," said Catharine, as she handed him down the bows and a sheaf of
arrows, which she quickly slung round his shoulders by the belt of skin,
which, the young hunter had made for himself.

"No fear, ma chere; they will stop to feed on the beds of rice and lilies.
We must have Wolfe. Here, Wolfe, Wolfe, Wolfe,--here, boy, here!"

Catharine caught a portion of the excitement that danced in the bright eyes
of her cousin, and declaring that she too would go and witness the hunt,
ran down the ravine by his side, while Wolfe, who evidently understood that
they had some sport in view, trotted along by his mistress, wagging his
great bushy tail, and looking in high good humour.

Hector was impatiently waiting the arrival of the bows and Wolfe. The herd
of deer, consisting of a noble buck, two full-grown females, and two young
half-grown males, were quietly feeding among the beds of rice and rushes,
not more than fifteen or twenty yards from the shore, apparently quite
unconcerned at the presence of Hector, who stood on a fallen trunk eagerly
eyeing their motions; but the hurried steps of Louis and Catharine, with
the deep sonorous baying of Wolfe, soon roused the timid creatures to a
sense of danger, and the stag, raising his head and making, as the children
thought, a signal for retreat, now struck boldly out for the nearest point
of Long Island.

"We shall lose them," cried Louis, despairingly, eyeing the long bright
track that cut the silvery waters, as the deer swam gallantly out.

"Hist, hist, Louis," said Hector, "all depends upon Wolfe. Turn them,
Wolfe; hey, hey, seek them, boy!"

Wolfe dashed bravely into the lake.

"Head them! head them!" shouted Hector.

Wolfe knew what was meant; with the sagacity of a long-trained hunter, he
made a desperate effort to gain the advantage by a circuitous route. Twice
the stag turned irresolute, as if to face his foe, and Wolfe, taking the
time, swam ahead, and then the race began. As soon as the boys saw the herd
had turned, and that Wolfe was between them and the island, they separated,
Louis making good his ambush to the right among the cedars, and Hector
at the spring to the west, while Catharine was stationed at the solitary
pine-tree, at the point which commanded the entrance of the ravine.

"Now, Cathy," said her brother, "when you see the herd making for the
ravine, shout and and, clap your hands, and they will turn either to the ten
right or to the left. Do not let them land, or we shall lose them. We must
trust to Wolfe for their not escaping to the island. Wolfe is well trained,
he knows what he is about."

Catharine proved a dutiful ally, she did as she was bid; she waited till
the deer were within a few yards of the shore, then she shouted and clapped
her hands. Frightened at the noise and clamour, the terrified creatures
coasted along for some way, till within a little distance of the thicket
where Hector lay concealed, the very spot from which they had emerged when
they first took to the water; to this place they boldly steered. Louis, who
had watched the direction the herd had taken with breathless interest, now
noiselessly hurried to Hector's assistance, taking an advantageous post for
aim, in case Hector's arrow missed, or only slightly wounded one of the
deer.

Hector, crouched beneath the trees, waited cautiously till one of the does
was within reach of his arrow, and so good and true was his aim, that it
hit the animal hi the throat a little above the chest; the stag now turned
again, but Wolfe was behind, and pressed him forward, and again the noble
animal strained every nerve for the shore. Louis now shot his arrow, but it
swerved from the mark, he was too eager, it glanced harmlessly along the
water; but the cool, unimpassioned hand of Hector sent another arrow
between the eyes of the doe, stunning her with its force, and then, another
from Louis laid her on her side, dying, and staining the water with her
blood.

The herd, abandoning their dying companion, dashed frantically to the
shore, and the young hunters, elated by their success, suffered them to
make good their landing without further molestation. Wolfe, at a signal
from his master, ran in the quarry, and Louis declared exultingly, that as
his last arrow had given the _coup de grace_, he was entitled to the honour
of cutting the throat of the doe; but this, the stern Highlander protested
against, and Louis, with a careless laugh, yielded the point, contenting
himself with saying, "Ah, well, I will get the first steak of the venison
when it is roasted, and that is far more to my taste." Moreover, he
privately recounted to Catharine the important share he had had in the
exploit, giving her, at the same time, full credit for the worthy service
she had performed, in withstanding the landing of the herd. Wolfe, too,
came in for a large share of the honour and glory of the chase.

The boys were soon hard at work, skinning the animal, and cutting it up.
This was the most valuable acquisition they had yet effected, for many uses
were to be made of the deer, besides eating the flesh. It was a store of
wealth in their eyes.

During the many years that their fathers had sojourned in the country,
there had been occasional intercourse with the fur traders and trappers,
and, sometimes, with friendly disposed Indians, who had called at the
lodges of their white brothers for food and tobacco.

From all these men, rude as they were, some practical knowledge had been
acquired, and their visits, though few and far between, had left good fruit
behind them; something to think about and talk about, and turn to future
advantage.

The boys had learned from the Indians how precious were the tough sinews
of the deer for sewing. They knew how to prepare the skins of the deer
for mocassins, which they could cut out and make as neatly as the squaws
themselves. They could fashion arrow-heads, and knew how best to season the
wood for making both the long and cross-bow; they had seen the fish-hooks
these people manufactured from bone and hard wood; they knew that strips of
fresh-cut skins would make bow-strings, or the entrails of animals dried
and rendered pliable. They had watched the squaws making baskets of the
inner bark of the oak, elm, and basswood, and mats of the inner bark of
the cedar, with many other ingenious works that they now found would prove
useful to them, after a little practice had perfected their inexperienced
attempts. They also knew how to dry venison as the Indians and trappers
prepare it, by cutting the thick fleshy portions of the meat into strips,
from four to six inches in breadth, and two or more in thickness. These
strips they strung upon poles supported on forked sticks, and exposed them
to the drying action of the sun and wind. Fish they split open, and removed
the back and head bones, and smoked them slightly, or dried them in the
sun.

Their success in killing the doe greatly raised their spirits; in their joy
they embraced each other, and bestowed the most affectionate caresses on
Wolfe for his good conduct.

"But for this dear, wise old fellow, we should have had no venison for
dinner to-day," said Louis; "and so, Wolfe, you shall have a choice piece
for your own share."

Every part of the deer seemed valuable in the eyes of the young hunters;
the skin they carefully stretched out upon sticks to dry gradually, and the
entrails they also preserved for bow-strings. The sinews of the legs and
back, they drew out, and laid carefully aside for future use.

"We shall be glad enough of these strings by-and-by," said careful Hector;
"for the summer will soon be at an end, and then we must turn our attention
to making ourselves winter clothes and mocassins."

"Yes, Hec., and a good warm shanty; these huts of bark and boughs will not
do when once the cold weather sets in."

"A shanty would soon be put up," said Hector; "for even Kate, wee bit
lassie as she is, could give us some help in trimming up the logs.

"That I could, indeed," replied Catherine; "for you may remember, Hec.,
that the last journey my father made to the Bay, [Footnote: Bay of Quints.]
with the pack of furs, that you and I called a _Bee_

[Footnote: A _Bee_ is a practical instance of duty to a neighbour. We
fear it is peculiar to Canada, although deserving of imitation in all
Christian colonies. When any work which requires many hands is in the
course of performance, as the building of log-houses, barns, or
shanties, all the neighbours are summoned, and give their best
assistance in the construction. Of course the assisted party is liable
to be called upon by the community in turn, to repay in kind the help he
has received.]

to put up a shed for the new cow that he was to drive back with him, and
I am sure Mathilde and I did as much good as you and Louis. You know you
said you could not have got on nearly so well without our help."

"Yes, and you cried because you got a fall off the shed when if was only
four logs high."

"It was not for the fall that I cried," said Catharine, resentfully, "but
because cousin Louis and you laughed at me, and said, 'Cats, you know, have
nine lives, and seldom are hurt, because they light on their feet,' and I
thought it was very cruel to laugh at me when I was in pain. Beside, you
called me 'puss,' and 'poor pussie' all the rest of the _Bee_."

"I am sure, ma belle, I am very sorry if I was rude to you," said Louis,
trying to look penitent for the offence. "For my part, I had forgotten all
about the fall; I only know that we passed a very merry day. Dear aunt made
us a fine Johnny-cake for tea, with lots of maple molasses; and the shed
was a capital shed, and the cow must have thought us fine builders, to have
made such a comfortable shelter for her, with no better help."

"After all," said Hector, thoughtfully; "children can do a great many
things if they only resolutely set to work, and use the wits and the
strength that God has given them to work with. A few weeks ago, and we
should have thought it utterly impossible to have supported ourselves in a
lonely wilderness like this by our own exertions in fishing and hunting."

"If we had been lost in the forest, we must have died with hunger," said
Catharine; "but let us be thankful to the good God who led us hither, and
gave us health and strength to help ourselves."




CHAPTER IV.

  "Aye from the sultry heat,
  We to our cave retreat,
  O'ercanopied by huge roots, intertwined,
  Of wildest texture, blacken'd o'er with age,
  Bound them their mantle green the climbers twine.
  Beneath whose mantle--pale,
  Fann'd by the breathing gale,
  We shield us from the fervid mid-day rage,
  Thither, while the murmuring throng
  Of wild bees hum their drowsy song."--COLERIDGE.

"Louis, what are you cutting out of that bit of wood?" said Catharine, the
very next day after the first ideas of the shanty had been started.

"Hollowing out a canoe."

"Out of that piece of stick?" said Catharine, laughing. "How many
passengers is it to accommodate, my dear."

"Don't teaze, ma belle. I am only making a model. My canoe will be made out
of a big pine log, and large enough to hold three."

"Is it to be like the big sap-trough in the sugar-bush at home?" Louis
nodded assent.

"I long to go over to the island; I see lots of ducks popping in and out
of the little bays beneath the cedars, and there are plenty of partridges,
I am sure, and squirrels,--it is the very place for them."

"And shall we have a sail as well as oars?"

"Yes; set up your apron for a sail."

Catharine cast a rueful look upon the tattered remnant of the apron.

"It is worth nothing now," she said, sighing; "and what am I to do when
my gown is worn out? It is a good thing it is so strong; if it had been
cotton, now, it would have been torn to bits among the bushes."

"We must make clothes of skins as soon as we get enough," said Hector;
"Louis, I think you can manufacture a bone needle; we can pierce the holes
with the strong thorns, or a little round bone bodkin, that can be easily
made."

"The first rainy day, we will see what we can do," replied Louis; "but I am
full of my canoe just now."

"Indeed, Louis, I believe you never think of anything else; but even if we
had a canoe to-morrow, I do not think that either you or I could manage
one," said cautions Hector.

"I could soon learn, as others have done before me. I wonder who first
taught the Indians to make canoes, and venture out on the lakes and
streams. Why should we be more stupid than these untaught heathens? I have
listened so often to my father's stories and adventures when he was out
lumbering on the St. John's river, that I am as familiar with the idea of
a boat, as if I had been born in one. Only think now, ma belle," he said,
turning to Catharine; "just think of the fish--the big ones we could get if
we had but a canoe to push out from the shore beyond those rush-beds."

"It strikes me, Louis, that those rush-beds, as you call them, must be the
Indian rice that we have seen the squaws make their soup of."

"Yes; and you remember old Jacob used to talk of a fine lake that he called
Rice Lake, somewhere to the northward of the Cold Springs, where he said
there was plenty of game of all kinds, and a fine open place, where people
could see through the openings among the trees. He said it was a great
hunting-place for the Indians in the fall of the year, and that they came
there to gather in the harvest of wild rice."

"I hope the Indians will not come here and find us out," said Catharine,
shuddering; "I think I should be more frightened at the Indians than at the
wolves. Have we not heard fearful tales of their cruelty?"

"But we have never been harmed by them; they have always been civil enough
when they came to the Springs." "They came, you know, for food, or shelter,
or something that they wanted from us; but it may be different when they
find us alone and unprotected, encroaching upon their hunting grounds."

"The place is wide enough for us and them; we will try and make them our
friends."

"The wolf and the lamb do not lie down in the fold together," observed
Hector. "The Indian is treacherous. The wild man and the civilized man do
not live well together, their habits and dispositions are so contrary the
one to the other. We are open, and they are cunning, and they suspect our
openness to be only a greater degree of cunning than their own--they do
not understand us. They are taught to be revengeful, and we are taught to
forgive our enemies. So you see that what is a virtue with the savage, is a
crime with the Christian. If the Indian could be taught the word of God, he
might be kind and true, and gentle as well as brave."

It was with conversations like this that our poor wanderers wiled away
their weariness. The love of life, and the exertions necessary for
self-preservation, occupied so large a portion of their thoughts and time,
that they had hardly leisure for repining. They mutually cheered and
animated each other to bear up against the sad fate that had thus severed
them from every kindred tie, and shut them out from that home to which
their young hearts were bound by every endearing remembrance from infancy
upwards.

One bright September morning, our young people set off on an exploring
expedition, leaving the faithful Wolfe to watch the wigwam, for they well
knew he was too honest to touch their store of dried fish and venison
himself, and too trusty and fierce to suffer wolf or wild cat near it.

They crossed several narrow deep ravines, and the low wooded flat
[Footnote: Now the fertile firm of Joe Harris, a Yankee settler whose
pleasant meadows and fields of grain form a pretty feature from the lake.
It is one of the oldest clearings on the shore, and speaks well for the
persevering industry of the settler and his family.] along the lake shore,
to the eastward of Pine-tree Point. Finding it difficult to force their
way through the thick underwood that always impedes the progress of the
traveller on the low shores of the lake, they followed the course of an
ascending narrow ridge, which formed a sort of natural causeway between two
parallel hollows, the top of this ridge being in many places, not wider
than a cart or waggon could pass along. The sides were most gracefully
adorned with flowering shrubs, wild vines, creepers of various species,
wild cherries of several kinds, hawthorns, bilberry bushes, high-bush
cranberries, silver birch, poplars, oaks and pines; while in the deep
ravines on either side grew trees of the largest growth, the heads of which
lay on a level with their path. Wild cliffy banks, beset with huge boulders
of red and grey granite and water-worn limestone, showed that it had once
formed the boundary of the lake, though now it was almost a quarter of a
mile in its rear. Springs of pure water were in abundance, trickling down
the steep rugged sides of this wooded glen. The children wandered onwards,
delighted with the wild picturesque path they had chosen, sometimes resting
on a huge block of moss-covered stone, or on the twisted roots of some
ancient grey old oak or pine, while they gazed with curiosity and interest
on the lonely but lovely landscape before them. Across the lake, the dark
forest shut all else from their view, rising in gradual far-off slopes,
till it reached the utmost boundary of sight. Much the children marvelled
what country it might be that lay in the dim, blue, hazy distance,--to
them, indeed, a _terra incognita_--a land of mystery; but neither of her
companions laughed when Catharine gravely suggested the probability of this
unknown shore to the northward being her father's beloved Highlands. Let
not youthful and more learned reader smile at the ignorance of the Canadian
girl; she knew nothing of maps, and globes, and hemispheres,--her only
book of study had been the Holy Scriptures, her only teacher a poor
Highland soldier.

Following the elevated ground above this deep valley, the travellers at
last halted on the extreme, edge of a high and precipitous mound, that
formed an abrupt termination to the deep glen. They found water not far
from this spot fit for drinking, by following a deer-path a little to the
southward. And there, on the borders of a little basin on a pleasant brae,
where the bright silver birch waved gracefully over its sides, they decided
upon building a winter house. They named the spot Mount Ararat: "For here."
said they, "we will build us an ark of refuge and wander no more." And
mount Ararat is the name which the spot still bears. Here they sat them
down on a fallen tree, and ate a meal of dried venison, and drank of the
cold spring that welled out from beneath the edge of the bank. Hector
felled a tree to mark the site of their house near the birches, and they
made a regular blaze on the trees as they returned home towards the wigwam,
that they might not miss the place. They found less difficulty in retracing
their path than they had formerly, a there were some striking peculiarities
to mark it, and they had learned to be very minute in the remarks they made
as they travelled, so that they now seldom missed the way they came by. A
few days after this, they removed all their household stores, viz. the axe,
the tin pot, bows and arrows, baskets, and bags of dried fruit, the dried
venison and fish, and the deerskin; nor did they forget the deer scalp,
which they bore away as a trophy, to be fastened up over the door of their
new dwelling, for a memorial of their first hunt on the shores of the Rice
Lake. The skin was given to Catharine to sleep on.

The boys were now busy from morning till night chopping down trees for
house-logs. It was a work of time and labour, as the axe was blunt, and the
oaks hard to cut; but they laboured on without grumbling, and Kate watched
the fall of each tree with lively joy. They were no longer dull; there was
something to look forward to from day to day-they were going to commence
housekeeping in good earnest and they should be warm and well lodged before
the bitter frosts of winter could come to chill their blood. It was a
joyful day when the log walls of the little shanty were put up, and the
door hewed out. Windows they had none, so they did not cut out the spaces
for them; [Footnote: Many a shanty is put up in Canada without windows, and
only an open space for a door, with a rude plank set up to close it in at
night.] they could do very well without, as hundreds of Irish and Highland
emigrants have done before and since.

A pile of stones rudely cemented together with wet clay and ashes against
the logs, and a hole cut in the roof, formed the chimney and hearth in this
primitive dwelling. The chinks were filled with wedge-shaped pieces of
wood, and plastered with clay: the trees, being chiefly oaks and pines,
afforded no moss. This deficiency rather surprised the boys, for in the
thick forest and close cedar swamps, moss grows in abundance on the north
side of the trees, especially on the cedar, maple, beech, bass, and iron
wood; but there were few of these, excepting a chance one or two in the
little basin in front of the house. The roof was next put on, which
consisted of split cedars; and when the little dwelling was thus far
habitable, they were all very happy. While the boys had been putting on the
roof, Catharine had collected the stones for the chimney, and cleared the
earthen floor of the chips and rubbish with a broom of cedar boughs, bound
together with a leathern thong. She had swept it all clean, carefully
removing all unsightly objects, and strewing it over with fresh cedar
sprigs, which gave out a pleasant odour, and formed a smooth and not
unseemly carpet for their little dwelling. How cheerful was the first fire
blazing up on their own hearth! It was so pleasant to sit by its gladdening
light, and chat away of all they had done and all that they meant to do.
Here was to be a set of split cedar shelves, to hold their provisions and
baskets; there a set of stout pegs were to be inserted between the logs for
hanging up strings of dried meat, bags of birch-bark, or the skins of the
animals they were to shoot or trap. A table was to be fixed on posts in the
centre of the floor. Louis was to carve wooden platters and dishes, and
some stools were to be made with hewn blocks of wood, till something better
could be devised. Their bedsteads were rough poles of iron-wood, supported
by posts driven into the ground, and partly upheld by the projection of the
logs at the angles of the wall. Nothing could be more simple. The framework
was of split cedar; and a safe bed was made by pine boughs being first
laid upon the frame, and then thickly covered with dried grass, moss, and
withered leaves. Such were the lowly but healthy couches on which these
children of the forest slept.

A dwelling so rudely framed and scantily furnished would be regarded with
disdain by the poorest English peasant. Yet many a settler's family have I
seen as roughly lodged, while a better house was being prepared for
their reception; and many a gentleman's son has voluntarily submitted to
privations as great as these, from the love of novelty and adventure, or
to embark in the tempting expectation of realizing money in the lumbering
trade, working hard, and sharing the rude log shanty and ruder society of
those reckless and hardy men, the Canadian lumberers. During the spring and
summer months, these men spread themselves through the trackless forests,
and along the shores of nameless lakes and unknown streams, to cut the pine
or oak lumber, such being the name they give to the felled stems of trees,
which are then hewn, and in the winter dragged out upon the ice, where they
are formed into rafts, and floated down the waters till they reach the
great St. Lawrence, and are, after innumerable difficulties and casualties,
finally shipped for England. I have likewise known European gentlemen
voluntarily leave the comforts of a civilized home, and associate
themselves with the Indian trappers and hunters, leading lives as wandering
and as wild as the uncultivated children of the forest. The nights and
early mornings were already growing sensibly more chilly. The dews at this
season fall heavily, and the mists fill the valleys, till the sun has risen
with sufficient heat to draw up the vapours. It was a good thing that the
shanty was finished so soon, or the exposure to the damp air might have
been productive of ague and fever. Every hour almost they spent in making
little additions to their household comforts, but some time was necessarily
passed in trying to obtain provisions. One day Hector, who had been out
from dawn till moonrise, returned with the welcome news that he had shot a
young deer, and required the assistance of his cousin to bring it up the
steep bank--(it was just at the entrance of the great ravine)--below the
precipitous cliff near the lake; he had left old Wolfe to guard it in the
meantime. They had now plenty of fresh broiled meat, and this store was
very acceptable, as they were obliged to be very careful of the dried meat
that they had.

This time Catharine adopted a new plan. Instead of cutting the meat in
strips, and drying it, (or jerking it, as the lumberers term it,) she
roasted it before the fire, and hung it up, wrapping it in thin sheets of
birch bark. The juices, instead of being dried up, were preserved, and the
meat was more palatable. Catharine found great store of wild plums in a
beautiful valley, not far from the shanty; these she dried for the winter
store, eating sparingly of them in their fresh state; she also found plenty
of wild black currants, and high-bush cranberries, on the banks of a
charming creek of bright water that flowed between a range of high pine
hills, and finally emptied itself into the lake.[Footnote: This little
stream flows through the green meadows of "Glenlynden," watering the
grounds of Mr. Alfred Hayward, whose picturesque cottage forms a most
attractive object to the eye of the traveller.] There were great quantities
of water-cresses in this pretty brook; they grew in bright round
cushion-like tufts at the bottom of the water, and were tender and
wholesome. These formed an agreeable addition to their diet, which had
hitherto been chiefly confined to animal food, for they could not always
meet with a supply of the bread-roots, as they grew chiefly in damp, swampy
thickets on the lake shore, which were sometimes very difficult of access;
however, they never missed any opportunity of increasing their stores, and
laying up for the winter such roots as they could procure.

As the cool weather and frosty nights drew on, the want of warm clothes and
bed-covering became more sensibly felt: those they had were beginning to
wear out. Catharine had managed to wash her clothes at the lake several
times, and thus preserved them clean and wholesome; but she was often
sorely puzzled how the want of her dress was to be supplied as time wore
on, and many were the consultations she held with the boys on the important
subject. With the aid of a needle she might be able to manufacture the
skins of the small animals into some sort of jacket, and the doe-skin
and deer-skin could be made into garments for the boys. Louis was always
suppling and rubbing the skins to make them soft. They had taken off the
hair by sprinkling it with wood ashes, and rolling it up with the hairy
side inwards. Out of one of these skins he made excellent mocassins,
piercing the holes with a sharpened bone bodkin, and passing the sinews of
the deer through, as he had seen his father do, by fixing a stout fish-bone
to the deer-sinew thread; thus he had an excellent substitute for a needle,
and with the aid of the old file he sharpened the point of the rusty nail,
so that he was enabled, with a little trouble, to drill a hole in a
bone needle, for his cousin Catharine's use. After several attempts, he
succeeded in making some of tolerable fineness, hardening them by exposure
to a slow steady degree of heat, till she was able to work with them, and
even mend her clothes with tolerable expertness. By degrees, Catharine
contrived to cover the whole outer surface of her homespun woollen frock
with squirrel and mink, musk-rat and woodchuck skins. A curious piece of
fur patchwork of many hues and textures it presented to the eye,--a coat of
many colours, it is true; but it kept the wearer warm, and Catharine was
not a little proud of her ingenuity and industry: every new patch that was
added was a source of fresh satisfaction, and the mocassins, that Louis
fitted so nicely to her feet, were great comforts. A fine skin that Hector
brought triumphantly in one day, the spoil from a fox that had been caught
in one of his deadfalls, was in due time converted into a dashing cap, the
brush remaining as an ornament to hang down on one shoulder. Catharine
might have passed for a small Diana, when she went out with her fur dress
and bow and arrows to hunt with Hector and Louis.

Whenever game of any kind was killed, it was carefully skinned and
stretched upon bent sticks, being first turned, so as to present the inner
part to the drying action of the air. The young hunters were most expert in
this work, having been accustomed for many years to assist their fathers in
preparing the furs which they disposed of to the fur traders, who visited
them from time to time, and gave them various articles in exchange for
their peltries; such as powder and shot, and cutlery of different kinds,
as knives, scissors, needles, and pins, with gay calicoes, and cotton
handkerchiefs for the women.

As the evenings lengthened, the boys employed themselves with carving
wooden platters: knives and forks and spoons they fashioned out of the
larger bones of the deer, which they often found bleaching in the sun and
wind, where they had been left by their enemies the wolves; baskets too
they made, and birch dishes, which they could now finish so well, that they
held water, or any liquid; but their great want was some vessel that would
bear the heat of the fire. The tin pot was so small that it could be made
little use of in the cooking way. Catharine had made an attempt at making
tea, on a small scale, of the leaves of the sweet fern,--a graceful woody
fern, with a fine aromatic scent like nutmegs; this plant is highly
esteemed among the Canadians as a beverage, and also as a remedy against
the ague; it grows in great abundance on dry sandy lands and wastes, by
waysides.

"If we could but make some sort of earthen pot that would stand the heat of
the fire," said Louis, "we could get on nicely with cooking." But nothing
like the sort of clay used by potters had been seen, and they were obliged
to give up that thought, and content themselves with roasting or broiling
their food. Louis, however, who was fond of contrivances, made an oven, by
hollowing out a place near the hearth, and lining it with stones, filling
up the intervals with wood ashes and such clay as they could find, beaten
into a smooth mortar. Such cement answered very well, and the oven was
heated by filling it with hot embers; these were removed when it was
sufficiently heated, and the meat or roots placed within, the oven being
covered over with a flat stone previously heated before the fire, and
covered with live coals. This sort of oven had often been described by old
Jacob, as one in common use among some of the Indian tribes in the lower
province, in which they cook small animals, and make excellent meat of
them; they could bake bread also in this oven, if they had had flour
to use. [Footnote: This primitive oven is much like what voyagers have
described as in use among the natives of many of the South Sea islands.]

Since the finishing of the house and furnishing it, the young people were
more reconciled to their lonely life, and even entertained decided home
feelings for their little log cabin. They never ceased, it is true, to talk
of their parents, and brothers, and sisters, and wonder if all were well,
and whether they still hoped for their return, and to recall all their happy
days spent in the home which they now feared they were destined never again
to behold. About the same time they lost the anxious hope of meeting
some one from home in search of them at every turn when they went out.
Nevertheless they were becoming each day more cheerful and more active.
Ardently attached to each other, they seemed bound together by a yet more
sacred tie of brotherhood. They were now all the world to one another, and
no cloud of disunion came to mar their happiness. Hector's habitual gravity
and caution were tempered by Louis's lively vivacity and ardour of temper,
and they both loved Catharine, and strove to smoothe, as much as possible,
the hard life to which she was exposed, by the most affectionate
consideration for her comfort, and she in return endeavoured to repay
them by cheerfully enduring all privations, and making light of all their
trials, and taking a lively interest in all their plans and contrivances.

Louis had gone out to fish at the lake one autumn morning. During his
absence, a sudden squall of wind came on, accompanied with heavy rain.
As he stayed longer than usual, Hector began to feel uneasy, lest some
accident had befallen him, knowing his adventurous spirit, and that he had
for some days previous been busy constructing a raft of cedar logs,
which he had fastened together with wooden pins. This raft he had nearly
finished, and was even talking of adventuring over to the nearest island to
explore it, and see what game, and roots, and fruits it afforded.

Bidding Catharine stay quietly within-doors till his return, Hector ran
off, not without some misgivings of evil having befallen his rash cousin,
which fears he carefully concealed from his sister, as he did not wish
to make her needlessly anxious. When he reached the shore, his mind was
somewhat relieved by seeing the raft on the beach, just as it had been left
the night before, but neither Louis nor the axe was to be seen, nor the
fishing-rod and line.

"Perhaps," thought he, "Louis has gone further down to the mouth of the
little creek, in the flat east of this, where we caught our last fish: or
maybe he has gone up to the old place at Pine-tree Point."

While he yet stood hesitating within himself which way to turn, he heard
steps as of some one running, and perceived his cousin hurrying through the
bushes in the direction of the shanty. It was evident by his disordered
air, and the hurried glances that he cast over his shoulder from time to
time, that something unusual had occurred to disturb him.

"Halloo! Louis, is it bear, wolf, or catamount that is on your trail?"
cried Hector, almost amused by the speed with which his cousin hurried
onward. "Why, Louis, whither away?"

Louis now turned and held up his hand, as if to enjoin silence, till Hector
came up to him.

"Why, man, what ails you? what makes you run as if you were hunted down by
a pack of wolves?"

"It is not wolves, or bears either," said Louis, as soon as he could get
breath to speak, "but the Indians are all on Bare-hill, holding a war
council, I suppose, for there are several canoe-loads of them."

"How came you to see them?"

"I must tell you that when I parted from you and Cathy, instead of going
down to my raft, as I thought at first I would do, I followed the deer path
through the little ravine, and then ascending the side of the valley, I
crossed the birch grove, and kept down the slope within sight of the creek.
While I was looking out upon the lake, and thinking how pretty the islands
were, rising so green from the blue water, I was surprised by seeing
several dark spots dotting the lake. At first, you may be sure, I thought
they must be a herd of deer, only they kept too far apart, so I sat down on
a log to watch, thinking if they turned out to be deer, I would race off
for you and Wolfe, and the bows and arrows, that we might try our chance
for some venison; but as the black specks came nearer and nearer, I
perceived they were canoes with Indians in them, three in each. They made
for the mouth of the creek, and ran ashore among the thick bushes. I
watched them with a beating heart, and lay down flat, lest they should spy
me out; for those fellows have eyes like catamounts, so keen and wild--they
see everything without seeming to cast a glance on it. Well, I saw them
wind up the ridge till they reached the Bare-hill. [Footnote: Supposed to
be a council hill. It is known by the name of Bare-hill, from the singular
want of verdure on its surface. It is one of the steepest on the ridge
above the little creek, being a picturesque object, with its fine
pine-trees, seen from Mr. Hayward's grounds, and forms, I believe, a part
of his property.] You remember that spot; we called it so from its barren
appearance. In a few minutes a column of smoke rose and curled among the
pine-trees, and then another and another, till I counted five fires burning
brightly; and, as I stood on the high ground, I could distinguish the
figures of many naked savages moving about, running to and fro like a
parcel of black ants on a cedar log; and by-and-by I heard them raise a
yell like a pack of ravenous wolves on a deer track. It made my heart leap
up in my breast. I forgot all the schemes that had just got into my wise
head, of slipping quietly down, and taking off one of the empty birch
canoes, which you must own would have been a glorious thing for us; but
when I heard the noise these wild wretches raised. I darted off, and ran
as if the whole set were at my heels. I think I just saved my scalp." And
Louis put his hand to his head, and tugged his thick black curls, as if to
ascertain that they were still safe from the scalping knives of his Indian
enemies.

"And now, Hec, what is to be done? We must hide ourselves from the Indians;
they will kill us, or take us away with them if they find us."

"Let us go home and talk over our plans with Cathy."

"Yes; for I have heard my father say two heads are better than one, and so
three of course must be still better than two."

"Why," said Hector, laughing, "it depends upon the stock of practical
wisdom in the heads, for two fools, you know, Louis, will hardly form one
rational plan."

Various were the schemes devised for their security. Hector proposed
pulling down the shanty, and dispersing the logs, so as to leave no trace
of the little dwelling; but to this neither his cousin nor his sister would
agree. To pull down the new house that had cost them so much labour, and
which had proved such a comfort to them, they could not endure even in
idea.

"Let us put out the fire, and hide ourselves in the big ravine below Mount
Ararat, dig a cave in one of the hills, and convey our house-hold goods
thither." Such was Louis's plan.

"The ravines would be searched directly," suggested Hector; "besides, the
Indians know they are famous coverts for deer and game of all sorts; they
might chance to pop upon us, and catch us like woodchucks in a burrow."

"Yes, and burn us," said Catharine, with a shudder. "I know the path that
leads direct to the 'Happy Valley,' (the name she had given to the low
flat, now known as the 'lower Race-course,') and it is not far from here,
only ten minutes' walk in a straight line. We can conceal ourselves below
the steep bank that we descended the other day; and there are several
springs of fresh water, and plenty of nuts and berries; and the trees,
though few, are so thickly covered with close spreading branches that touch
the very ground, that we might hide ourselves from a hundred eyes were they
ever so cunning and prying."

Catharine's counsel was deemed the most prudent, and the boys immediately
busied themselves with hiding under the broken branches of a prostrate tree
such articles as they could not conveniently carry away, leaving the rest
to chance; with the most valuable they loaded themselves, and guided by
Catharine, who, with her dear old dog, marched forward along the narrow
footpath that had been made by some wild animals, probably deer, in their
passage from the lake to their feeding-place, or favorite covert, on the
low sheltered plain; where, being quite open, and almost, in parts, free
from trees, the grass and herbage were sweeter and more abundant, and the
springs of water fresh and cool.

Catharine cast many a fearful glance through the brushwood as they moved
onward, but saw no living thing, excepting a family of chipmunks gaily
chasing each other along a fallen branch, and a covey of quails, that
were feeding quietly on the red berries of the _Mitchella repens,_ or
twinberry, [Footnote: Also partridge-berry and checker-berry, a lovely
creeping winter-green, with white fragrant flowers, and double scarlet
berry.] as it is commonly called, of which the partridges and quails
are extremely fond; for Nature, with liberal hand, has spread abroad her
bounties for the small denizens, furred or feathered, that haunt the Rice
Lake and its flowery shores.

After a continued but gentle ascent through the oak opening, they halted at
the foot of a majestic pine, and looked round them. It was a lovely spot
as any they had seen; from west to east, the lake, bending like a silver
crescent, lay between the boundary hills of forest trees; in front, the
long lines of undulating wood-covered heights faded away into mist, and
blended with the horizon. To the east, a deep and fertile valley lay
between the high lands, on which they rested, and the far ridge of oak
hills. From their vantage height, they could distinguish the outline of the
Bare-hill, made more distinct by its flickering fires and the smoke wreaths
that hung like a pearly-tinted robe among the dark pines that grew upon its
crest. Not long tarrying did our fugitives make, though perfectly safe from
detection by the distance and their shaded position, for many a winding
vale and wood-crowned height lay between them and the encampment.

But fear is not subject to the control of reason, and in the present
instance it invested the dreaded Indians with superhuman powers of sight
and of motion. A few minutes' hasty flight brought our travellers to the
brow of a precipitous bank, nearly a hundred feet above the level open
plain which they sought. Here, then, they felt comparatively safe: they
were out of sight of the camp fires, the spot they had chosen was open,
and flight, in case of the approach of the Indians, not difficult, while
hiding-places were easy of access. They found a deep, sheltered hollow
in the bank, where two mighty pines had beep torn up by the roots, and
prostrated headlong down the steep, forming a regular cave, roofed by the
earth and fibres that had been uplifted in their fall. Pendent from these
roots hung a luxuriant curtain of wild grapevines and other creepers, which
formed a leafy screen, through which the most curious eye could scarcely
penetrate. This friendly vegetable veil seemed as if provided for their
concealment, and they carefully abstained from disturbing the pendent
foliage, lest they should, by so doing, betray their hiding-place to their
enemies. They found plenty of long grass, and abundance of long soft green
moss and ferns near a small grove of poplars, which surrounded a spring of
fine water. They ate some dried fruit and smoked fish, and drank some of
the clear spring; and after they had said their evening prayers, they
laid down to sleep, Catharine's head pillowed on the neck of her faithful
guardian, Wolfe. In the middle of the night a startling sound, as of some
heavy body falling, wakened them all simultaneously. The night was so
dark they could see nothing, and terror-struck, they sat gazing into the
impenetrable darkness of their cave, not even daring to speak to each
other, hardly even to breathe. Wolfe gave a low grumbling bark, and resumed
his couchant posture as if nothing worthy of his attention was near to
cause the disturbance. Catharine trembled and wept, and prayed for safety
against the Indians and beasts of prey, and Hector and Louis listened, till
they fell asleep in spite of their fears. In the morning, it seemed as if
they had dreamed some terrible dream, so vague were their recollections of
the fright they had had, but the cause was soon perceived. A large stone
that had been heaved up with the clay that adhered to the roots and fibres,
had been loosened, and had fallen on the ground, close to the spot where
Catharine lay. So ponderous was the mass, that had it struck her, death
must have been the consequence of the blow; and Hector and Louis beheld it
with fear and amazement, while Catharine regarded it as a proof of Divine
mercy and protection from Him in whose hand her safety lay. The boys,
warned by this accident, carefully removed several large stones from the
roof, and tried the safety of their clay walls with a stout staff, to
ascertain that all was secure, before they again ventured to sleep beneath
this rugged canopy.




CHAPTER V.

"The soul of the wicked desireth evil; his neighbour findeth no favour in
his eyes."--_Proverbs_.

FOR several days, they abstained from lighting a fire, lest the smoke
should be seen; but this, the great height of the bank would have
effectually prevented. They suffered much cold at night from the copious
dews, which, even on sultry summer's evenings, is productive of much
chilling. They could not account for the fact that the air, at night, was
much warmer on the high hills than in the low valleys; they were even
sensible of a rush of heat as they ascended to the higher ground. These
simple children had not been taught that it is the nature of the heated air
to ascend, and its place to be supplied by the colder and denser particles.
They noticed the effects, but understood nothing of the causes that ruled
them.

The following days they procured several partridges, but feared to cook
them; however, they plucked them, split them open, and dried the flesh for
a future day. A fox or racoon attracted by the smell of the birds, came one
night, and carried them off, for in the morning they were gone. They saw
several herd of deer crossing the plain, and one day Wolfe tracked a
wounded doe to a covert under the poplars, near a hidden spring, where she
had lain herself down to die in peace, far from the haunts of her fellows.
The arrow was in her throat; it was of white flint, and had evidently been
sent from an Indian bow. It was almost with fear and trembling that they
availed themselves of the venison thus providentially thrown in their way,
lest the Indians should track the blood of the doe, and take vengeance on
them for appropriating it for their own use. Not having seen anything of
the Indians, who seemed to confine themselves to the neighbourhood of the
lake, after many days had passed, they began to take courage, and even
lighted an evening fire, at which they cooked as much venison as would last
them for several days, and hung the remaining portions above the smoke to
preserve it from injury.

One morning, Hector proclaimed his intention of ascending the hills, in the
direction of the Indian camp. "I am tired of remaining shut up in this
dull place, where we can see nothing but this dead flat, bounded by those
melancholy pines in the distance that seem to shut us in." Little did
Hector know that beyond that dark ridge of pine hills lay the home of their
childhood, and but a few miles of forest intervened to hide it from their
sight. Had he known it how eagerly would his feet have pressed onward in
the direction of that dark barrier of evergreens!

Thus is it often in this life: we wander on, sad and perplexed, our path
beset with thorns and briars. We cannot see our way clear; doubts and
apprehensions assail us. We know not how near we are to the fulfilment of
our wishes: we see only the insurmountable barriers, the dark thickets and
thorns of our way; and we know not how near we are to our Father's home.
where he is waiting to welcome the wanderers of the flock back to the
everlasting home, the fold of the Good Shepherd.

Hector became impatient of the restraint that the dread of the Indians
imposed upon his movements; he wanted to see the lake again and to roam
abroad free and uncontrolled.

"After all," said he; "we never met with any ill treatment from the Indians
that used to visit us at Cold Springs; we may even find old friends and
acquaintances among them."

"The thing is possible, but not very likely," replied Louis. "Nevertheless,
Hector, I would not willingly put myself in their power. The Indian has his
own notion of things, and might think himself quite justified in killing
us, if he found us on his hunting-grounds. [Footnote: George Copway, an
intelligent Rice Lake Indian, says the Indian hunting-grounds are parcelled
out, and secured by right of law and custom among themselves, no one being
allowed to hunt upon another's grounds uninvited. If any one belonging to
another family or tribe is found trespassing, all his goods are taken from
him; a handful of powder and shot, as much as he would need to shoot game
for his sustenance in returning straight home, and his gun, knife, and
tomahawk only are left, but all his game and furs are taken from him: a
message is sent to his chief, and if he transgresses a third time, he
is banished and outlawed.--_Life of G. Copway, Missionary, written by
himself._] I have heard my father say,--and he knows a great deal about
these people,--that their chiefs are very strict in punishing any strangers
that they find killing game on their bounds uninvited. They are both
merciless and treacherous when angered, and we could not even speak to them
in their own language, to explain by what chance we came here."

This was very prudent of Louis, uncommonly so, for one who was naturally
rash and headstrong, but unfortunately Hector was inflexible and wilful:
when once he had made up his mind upon any point, he had too good an
opinion of his own judgment to give it up. At last, he declared his
intention, rather than remain a slave to such cowardly fears as he now
deemed them, to go forth boldly, and endeavour to ascertain what the
Indians were about, how many there were of them, and what real danger was
to be apprehended from facing them.

"Depend upon it," he added, "cowards are never safer than brave men. The
Indians despise cowards, and would be more likely to kill us if they found
us cowering here in this hole like a parcel of wolf-cubs, than if we openly
faced them and showed that we neither feared them, nor cared for them."

"Hector, dear Hector, be not so rash!" cried his sister, passionately
weeping. "Ah! if we were to lose you, what would become of us?"

"Never fear, Kate; I will run into no needless danger. I know how to take
care of myself. I am of opinion, that the Indian camp is broken up; they
seldom stay long in one place. I will go over the hills and examine the
camp at a distance and the lake shore. You and Louis may keep watch for my
return from the big pine that we halted under on our way hither."

"But, Hector, if the savages should see you and take you prisoner," said
Catharine, "what would you do?" "I will tell you what I would do. Instead
of running away, I would boldly walk up to them, and by signs make them
understand that I am no scout, but a friend in need of nothing but kindness
and friendship. I never yet heard of the Indian that would tomahawk the
defenceless stranger that sought his camp openly in peace and goodwill."

"If you do not return by sunset, Hector, we shall believe that you have
fallen into the hands of the savages," said Catharine, mournfully regarding
her brother.

"If it were not for Catharine," said Louis, "you should not go alone, but,
if evil befel this helpless one, her blood would be upon my head, who led
her out with us, tempting her with false words."

"Never mind that now, dearest cousin," said Catharine, tenderly laying her
hand on his arm. "It is much better that we should have been all three
together; I should never have been happy again if I had lost both Hec and
you. It is better as it is; you and Hec would not have been so well off if
I had not been with you to help you, and keep up your spirits by my songs
and stories."

"It is true, ma chere; but that is the reason that I am bound to take care
of my little cousin, and I could not consent to exposing you to danger, or
leaving you alone; so, if Hec will be so headstrong, I will abide by you."

Hector was so confident that he should return in safety, that at last Louis
and Catharine became more reconciled to his leaving them, and soon busied
themselves in preparing some squirrels that Louis had brought in that
morning.

The day wore away slowly, and many were the anxious glances that Catharine
cast over the crest of the high bank to watch for her brother's return; at
last, unable to endure the suspense, she with Louis left the shelter of the
valley; they ascended the high ground, and bent their steps to the trysting
tree, which commanded all the country within a wide sweep.

A painful and oppressive sense of loneliness? and desolation came over the
minds of the cousins as they sat together at the foot of the pine, which
cast its lengthened shadow upon the ground before them. The shades of
evening were shrouding them, wrapping the lonely forest in gloom. The full
moon had not yet risen, and they watched for the first gleam that should
break above the eastern hills to cheer them, as for the coming of a friend.

Sadly these two poor lonely ones sat hand in hand, talking of the happy
days of childhood, or the perplexing present and the uncertain future. At
last, wearied out with watching and anxiety, Catharine leaned her head upon
the neck of old Wolfe and fell asleep, while Louis restlessly paced to
and fro in front of the sleeper; now straining his eye to penetrate the
surrounding gloom, now straining his ear to catch the first sound that
might indicate the approach of his absent cousin.

It was almost with a feeling of irritability that he heard the quick sharp
note of the "Whip-poor-will," as she flew from bough to bough of an old
withered tree beside him. Another, and again another of these midnight
watchers took up the monotonous never-varying cry of "Whip-poor-will,
Whip-poor-will;" and then came forth, from many a hollow oak and birch, the
spectral night-hawk from hidden dens, where it had lain hushed in silence
all day, from dawn till sunset. Sometimes their sharp hard wings almost
swept his cheek as they wheeled round and round in circles, first narrow,
then wide, and wider extending, till at last they soared far above the
tallest tree-tops and launching out in the high regions of the air,
uttered from time to time a wild shrill scream, or hollow booming sound,
as they suddenly descended to pounce with wide-extended throat upon some
hapless moth or insect, that sported all unheeding in mid air, happily
unconscious of the approach of so unerring a foe.

Petulantly Louis chid these discordant minstrels of the night, and joyfully
he hailed the first gush of moonlight that rose broad and full and red,
over the Oak-hills to the eastward.

Louis envied the condition of the unconscious sleeper, who lay in happy
forgetfulness of all her sorrows, her fair curls spread in unbound
luxuriance over the dark shaggy neck of the faithful Wolfe, who seemed
as if proud of the beloved burden that rested so trustingly upon him.
Sometimes the careful dog just unclosed his large eyes, raised his nose
from his shaggy paws, snuffed the night air, growled in a sort of under
tone, and dosed again, but watchfully.

It would be no easy task to tell the painful feelings that agitated young
Louis's breast. He was angry with Hector, for having thus madly, as he
thought, rushed into danger. "It was wilful and almost cruel," he thought
"to leave them the prey of such tormenting fears on his account;" and then
the most painful fears for the safety of his beloved companion took the
place of less kindly thoughts, and sorrow filled his heart. The broad
moon now flooded the hills and vales with light, casting broad checkering
shadows of the old oaks' grey branches and now reddened foliage across the
ground.

Suddenly the old dog raises his head, and utters a short half angry note:
slowly and carefully he rises, disengaging himself gently from the form of
the sleeping girl, and stands forth in the full light of the moon. It is an
open cleared space, that mound beneath the pine-tree; a few low shrubs and
seedling pines, with the slender waving branches of the late-flowering
pearly tinted asters, the elegant fringed gentian, with open bells of
azure blue, the last and loveliest of the fall flowers and winter-greens,
brighten the ground with wreaths of shining leaves and red berries.

Louis is on the alert, though as yet he sees nothing. It is not a full free
note of welcome, that Wolfe gives; there is something uneasy and half angry
in his tone. Yet it is not fierce, like the bark of angry defiance he
gives, when wolf, or bear, or wolverine is near.

Louis steps forward from the shadow of the pine branches, to the edge of
the inclined plane in the foreground. The slow tread of approaching steps
is now distinctly heard advancing--it may be a deer. Two figures approach,
and Louis moves a little, within the shadow again. A clear shrill whistle
meets his ear. It is Hector's whistle, he knows that, and assured by its
cheerful tone, he springs forward and in an instant is at his side, but
starts at the strange, companion that he half leads, half carries. The
moonlight streams broad and bright upon the shrinking figure of an Indian
girl, apparently about the same age as Catharine: her ashy face is
concealed by the long masses of raven black hair, which falls like a dark
veil over her features; her step is weak and unsteady, and she seems ready
to sink to the earth with sickness or fatigue. Hector, too, seems weary.
The first words that' Hector said were, "Help me, Louis, to lead this poor
girl to the foot of the pine; I am so tired I can hardly walk another
step."

Louis and his cousin together carried the Indian girl to the foot of the
pine. Catharine was just rousing herself from sleep, and she gazed with a
bewildered air on the strange companion that Hector had brought with him.
The stranger lay down, and in a few minutes sank into a sleep so profound
it seemed to resemble that of death itself. Pity and deep interest soon
took the place of curiosity and dread in the heart of the gentle Catharine,
and she watched the young stranger's slumber as tenderly as though she had
been a sister, or beloved friend, while Hector proceeded to relate in what
manner he had encountered the Indian girl.

"When I struck the high slope near the little birch grove we called the
_'birken shaw,'_ I paused to examine if the council-fires were still
burning on Bare-hill, but there was no smoke visible, neither was there
a canoe to be seen at the lake shore where Louis had described their
landing-place at the mouth of the creek. All seemed as silent and still
as if no human footstep had trodden the shore. I sat down and watched for
nearly an hour till my attention was attracted by a noble eagle, which was
sailing in wide circles over the tall pine-trees on Bare-hill. Assured that
the Indian camp was broken up, and feeling some curiosity to examine the
spot more closely, I crossed the thicket of cranberries and cedars and
small underwood that fringed the borders of the little stream, and found
myself, after a little pushing and scrambling, among the bushes at the foot
of the hill.

"I thought it not impossible I might find something to repay me for my
trouble--flint arrow-heads, a knife, or a tomahawk--but I little thought
of what these cruel savages had left there,--a miserable wounded captive,
bound by the long locks of her hair to the stem of a small tree, her hands,
tied by thongs of hide to branches which they had bent down to fasten them
to her feet, bound fast to the same tree as that against which her head was
fastened; her position was one that must have been most painful: she had
evidently been thus left to perish by a miserable death, of hunger and
thirst; for these savages, with a fiendish cruelty, had placed within sight
of their victim an earthen jar of water, some dried deers' flesh, and a cob
[Footnote: A head of the Maize, or Indian corn, is called a "cob."] of
Indian corn. I have the corn here," he added, putting his hand in his
breast, and displaying it to view.

"Wounded she was, for I drew this arrow from her shoulder," and he showed
the flint head as he spoke, "and fettered; with food and drink in sight,
the poor girl was to perish, perhaps to become a living prey to the wolf,
and the eagle that I saw wheeling above the hill top. The poor thing's lips
were black and parched with pain and thirst; she turned her eyes piteously
from my face to the water jar as if to implore a draught. This I gave her,
and then having cooled the festering wound, and cut the thongs that bound
her, I wondered that she still kept the same immoveable attitude, and
thinking she was stiff and cramped with remaining so long bound in one
position, I took her two hands and tried to induce her to move. I then for
the first time noticed that she was tied by the hair of her head to the
tree against which her back was placed; I was obliged to cut the hair with
my knife, and this I did not do without giving her pain, as she moaned
impatiently. She sunk her head on her breast, and large tears fell over my
hands, as I bathed her face and neck with the water from the jar; she then
seated herself on the ground, and remained silent and still for the space
of an hour, nor could I prevail upon her to speak, or quit the seat she had
taken. Fearing that the Indians might return, I watched in all directions,
and at last I began to think it would be best to carry her in my arms; but
this I found no easy task, for she seemed greatly distressed at any attempt
I made to lift her, and by her gestures I fancy she thought I was going to
kill her. At last my patience began to be exhausted, but I did not like to
annoy her. I spoke to her as gently and soothingly as I could. By degrees
she seemed to listen with more composure to me, though she evidently knew
not a word of what I said to her. She rose at last, and taking my hands,
placed them above her head, stooping low as she did so, and this seemed to
mean, she was willing at last to submit to my wishes; I lifted her from
the ground, and carried her for some little way, but she was too heavy for
me,--she then suffered me to lead her along whithersoever I would take her,
but her steps were so slow and feeble, through weakness, that many times I
was compelled to rest while she recovered herself. She seems quite subdued
now, and as quiet as a lamb."

Catharine listened, not without tears of genuine sympathy, to the recital
of her brother's adventures. She seemed to think he had been inspired by
God to go forth that day to the Indian camp, to rescue the poor forlorn one
from so dreadful a death.

Louis's sympathy was also warmly aroused for the young savage, and he
commended Hector for his bravery and humanity.

He then set to work to light a good fire, which was a great addition to
their comfort as well as cheerfulness. They did not go back to their cave
beneath the upturned trees, to sleep, preferring lying, with their feet to
the fire, under the shade of the pine. Louis, however, was despatched for
water and venison for supper.

The following morning, by break of day, they collected their stores, and
conveyed them back to the shanty. The boys were thus employed, while
Catharine watched beside the wounded Indian girl, whom she tended with the
greatest care. She bathed the inflamed arm with water, and bound the cool
healing leaves of the _tacamahac_ [Footnote: Indian balsam.] about it with
the last fragment of her apron, she steeped dried berries in water, and
gave the cooling drink to quench the fever-thirst that burned in her veins,
and glittered in her full soft melancholy dark eyes, which were raised at
intervals to the face of her youthful nurse, with a timid hurried glance,
as if she longed, yet feared to say, "Who are you that thus tenderly bathe
my aching head, and strive to soothe my wounded limbs, and cool my fevered
blood? Are you a creature like myself, or a being sent by the Great Spirit,
from the far-off happy land to which my fathers have gone, to smooth my
path of pain, and lead me to those blessed fields of sunbeams and flowers
where the cruelty of the enemies of my people will no more have power to
torment me?"




CHAPTER VI.

  "Here the wren of softest note
  Builds its nest and warbles well;
  Here the blackbird strains his throat;
  Welcome, welcome to our cell."--COLERIDGE.

The day was far advanced, before the sick Indian girl could be brought home
to their sylvan lodge, where Catharine made up a comfortable couch for her,
with boughs and grass, and spread one of the deer-skins over it, and laid
her down as tenderly and carefully as if she had been a dear sister. This
good girl was overjoyed at having found a companion of her own age and sex.
"Now," said she, "I shall no more be lonely, I shall have a companion and
friend to talk to and assist me;" but when she turned in the fulness of
her heart to address herself to the young stranger, she felt herself
embarrassed in what way to make her comprehend the words she used to
express the kindness that she felt for her, and her sorrow for her
sufferings.

The young stranger would raise her head, look intently at her, as if
striving to interpret her words, then sadly shake her head, and utter her
words in her own plaintive language, but, alas! Catharine felt it was to
her as a sealed book.

She tried to recall some Indian words of familiar import, that she had heard
from the Indians when they came to her father's house, but in vain; not the
simplest phrase occurred to her, and she almost cried with vexation at her
own stupidity; neither was Hector or Louis more fortunate in attempts at
conversing with their guest.

At the end of three days, the fever began to abate; the restless eye grew
more steady in its gaze, the dark flush faded from the cheek, leaving it of
a grey ashy tint, not the hue of health, such as even the swarthy Indian
shows, but wan and pallid, her eyes bent mournfully on the ground.

She would sit quiet and passive while Catharine bound up the long tresses
of her hair, and smoothed them with her hands and the small wooden comb
that Louis had cut for her use. Sometimes she would raise her eyes to her
new friend's face, with a quiet sad smile, and once she took her hands
within her own, and gently pressed them to her breast and lips and forehead
in token of gratitude, but she seldom gave utterance to any words, and
would remain with her eyes fixed vacantly on some object which seemed
unseen or to awaken no idea in her mind. At such times the face of the
young squaw wore a dreamy apathy of expression, or rather it might with
more propriety have been said, the absence of all expression, almost as
blank as that of an infant of a few weeks old.

How intently did Catharine study that face, and strive to read what was
passing within her mind! how did the lively intelligent Canadian girl, the
offspring of a more intellectual race, long to instruct her Indian friend,
to enlarge her mind by pointing out such things to her attention as she
herself took interest in! She would then repeat the name of the object that
she showed her several times over, and by degrees the young squaw learned
the names of all the familiar household articles about the shanty, and
could repeat them in her own soft plaintive tone; and when she had learned
a new word, and could pronounce it distinctly, she would laugh, and a gleam
of innocent joy and pleasure would lighten up her fine dark eyes, generally
so fixed and sad-looking.

It was Catharine's delight to teach her pupil to speak a language familiar
to her own ears; she would lead her out among the trees, and name to her
all the natural objects that presented themselves to view. And she in her
turn made "Indiana" (for so they named the young squaw, after a negress
that she had heard her father tell of, a nurse to one of his Colonel's
infant children,) tell her the Indian names for each object they saw.
Indiana soon began to enjoy in her turn the amusement arising from
instructing Catharine and the boys, and often seemed to enjoy the blunders
they made in pronouncing the words she taught them. When really interested
in anything that was going on, her eyes would beam out, and her smile gave
an inexpressible charm to her face, for her lips were red and her teeth
even and brilliantly white, so purely white that Catharine thought she had
never seen any so beautiful in her life before; at such times her face
was joyous and innocent as a little child's, but there were also hours of
gloom, that transformed it into an expression of sullen apathy; then a dull
glassy look took possession of her eye, the full lip drooped and the form
seemed rigid and stiff; obstinate determination neither to move nor speak
characterised her in what Louis used to call the young squaw's "_dark
hour._" Then it was that the savage nature seemed predominant, and her
gentle nurse almost feared to look at her protegee or approach her.

"Hector," said Louis, "you spoke about a jar of water being left at the
camp; the jar would be a great treasure to us, let us go over for it."
Hector assented to the proposal. "And we may possibly pick up a few grains
of Indian corn, to add to what you showed us."

"If we are here in the spring," said Hector, "you and I will prepare a
small patch of ground and plant it with this corn;" and he sat down on the
end of a log and began carefully to count the rows of grain on the cob, and
then each corn grain by grain. "Three hundred and ten sound grains. Now if
every one of these produces a strong plant, we shall have a great increase,
and beside seed for another year, there will be, if it is a good year,
several bushels to eat."

"We shall have a glorious summer, mon ami, no doubt, and a fine flourishing
crop, and Kate is a good hand at making supporne." [Footnote: Supporne,
probably an Indian word for a stir-about, or porridge, made of Indian meal,
a common dish in every Canadian or Yankee farmer's house.]

"You forget we have no porridge pot."

"I was thinking of that Indian jar all the time. You will see what fine
cookery we will make when we get it, if it will but stand fire. Come, let
us be off, I am impatient till we get it home;" and Louis, who had now a
new crotchet at work in his fertile and vivacious brain, was quite on the
_qui vive_, and walked and danced along at a rate which proved a great
disturbance to his graver companion, who tried to keep down his cousin's
lively spirits, by suggesting the probability of the jar being cracked, or
that the Indians might have returned for it; but Louis was not one of the
doubting sort, and Louis was right in not damping the ardour of his mind by
causeless fears. The jar was there at the deserted camp, and though it had
been knocked over by some animal, it was sound and strong, and excited
great speculation in the two cousins, as to the particular material of
which it was made, as it was unlike any sort of pottery they had ever
before seen. It seemed to have been manufactured from some very dark
red earth, or clay mixed up with pounded granite, as it presented the
appearance of some coarse crystals; it was very hard and ponderous, and
the surface was marked over in a rude sort of pattern as if punctured and
scratched with some pointed instrument. It seemed to have been hardened by
fire, and, from the smoked hue of one side, had evidently done good service
as a cooking utensil. Subsequently they learned the way in which it was
used:[Footnote: Pieces of this rude pottery are often found along theshores
of the inland lakes, but I have never met with any of the perfect vessels
in use with the Indians, who probably find it now easier to supply
themselves with iron pots and crockery from the towns of the European
settlers.] the jar being placed near but not on the fire, was surrounded
by hot embers, and the water made to boil by stones being made red hot and
plunged into it: in this way soup and other food were prepared, and kept
stewing, with no further trouble after once the simmering began, than
adding a few fresh embers at the side furthest from the fir; a hot stone
also placed on the top, facilitated the cooking process.

Louis, who like all French people was addicted to cookery,--indeed it was
an accomplishment he prided himself on,--was enchanted with the improvement
made in their diet by the acquisition of the said earthen jar, or pipkin,
and gave Indiana some praise for initiating his cousin in the use of it.
Catharine and Hector declared that he went out with his bow and arrows, and
visited his dead-falls and snares, ten times oftener than he used to do,
just for the sake of proving the admirable properties of this precious
utensil, and finding out some new way of dressing his game. At all events
there was a valuable increase of furs, for making up into clothing, caps,
leggings, mitts, and other articles.

From the Indian girl Catharine learned the value of many of the herbs and
shrubs that grew in her path, the bark and leaves of various trees, and
many dyes she could extract, with which she stained the quills of the
porcupine and the strips of the wood of which she made baskets and
mats. The little creeping winter-green, [Footnote: _Gualtheria
procumbens_,--Spice Winter-green.] with its scarlet berries, that grows on
the dry flats, or sandy hills, which the Canadians call spice-berry, she
showed them was good to eat, and she would crush the leaves, draw forth
their fine aromatic flavour in her hands, and then inhale their fragrance
with delight. She made an infusion of the leaves, and drank it as a tonic.
The inner bark of the wild black cherry, she said was good to cure ague and
fever. The root of the _dulcamara_, or bitter-sweet, she scraped down
and boiled in the deer-fat, or the fat of any other animal, and made an
ointment that possessed very healing qualities, especially as an immediate
application to fresh burns.

Sometimes she showed a disposition to mystery, and would conceal the
knowledge of the particular herbs she made use of; and Catharine several
times noticed that she would go out and sprinkle a portion of the food she
had assisted her in preparing, on the earth, or under some of the trees or
bushes. When she was more familiar with their language, she told Catharine
this was done in token of gratitude to the Good Spirit, who had given them
success in hunting or trapping; or else it was to appease the malice of
the Evil Spirit, who might bring mischief or loss to them, or sickness or
death, unless his forbearance was purchased by some particular mark of
attention. [Footnote: By the testimony of many of the Indians themselves,
they appear to entertain a certain Polytheism in their belief. "We believed
in one great wise benevolent being, Thesha-mon-e-doo, whose dwelling was
in the sun. We believed also in many other lesser spirits--gods of the
elements, and in one bad unappeasable spirit, Mah-je-mah-ne-doo, to whom
we attributed bad luck, evil accidents, and sickness and death. This bad
spirit has to be conciliated with meat and drink offerings."--_Life of
George Copway, Native Missionary_]

Attention, memory, and imitation, appeared to form the three most
remarkable of the mental faculties developed by the Indian girl. She
examined (when once her attention was roused) any object with critical
minuteness. Any knowledge she had once acquired, she retained; her memory
was great, she never missed a path she had once trodden; she seemed even to
single out particular birds in a flock, to know them from their congeners.
Her powers of imitation were also great; she brought patience and
perseverance to assist her, and when once thoroughly interested in any work
she began, she would toil on untiringly till it was completed; and then
what triumph shone in her eyes! At such times they became darkly brilliant
with the joy that filled her heart. But she possessed little talent for
invention; what she had seen done, after a few imperfect attempts, she
could do again, but she rarely struck out any new path for herself.

At times she was docile and even playful, and appeared grateful for the
kindness with which she was treated; each day seemed to increase her
fondness for Catharine, and she appeared to delight in doing any little
service to please and gratify her, but it was towards Hector that she
displayed the deepest feeling of affection and respect. It was to him her
first tribute of fruit or flowers, furs, mocassins, or ornamental plumage
of rare birds was offered. She seemed to turn to him as to a master and
protector. He was in her eyes the _"Chief,"_ the head of his tribe. His bow
was strung by her, and stained with quaint figures and devices; his arrows
were carved by her; the sheath of deer-skin was made and ornamented by
her hands, that he carried his knife in; and the case for his arrows, of
birch-bark, was wrought with especial neatness, and suspended by thongs to
his neck, when he was preparing to go out in search of game. She gave him
the name of the "Young Eagle." While she called Louis, "Nee-chee," or
friend; to Catharine she gave the poetical name of, "Music of the Winds,"--
Ma-wah-osh.

When they asked her to tell them her own name, she would bend down her head
in sorrow and refuse to pronounce it. She soon answered to the name of
Indiana, and seemed pleased with the sound.

But of all the household, next to Hector, old Wolfe was her greatest
favourite. At first, it is true, the old dog regarded the new inmate with a
jealous eye, and seemed uneasy when he saw her approach to caress him, but
Indiana soon reconciled him to her person, and a mutual friendly feeling
became established between them, which seemed daily and hourly to increase,
greatly to the delight of the young stranger. She would seat herself
Eastern fashion, cross-legged on the floor of the shanty, with the
capacious head of the old dog in her lap, and address herself to this mute
companion, in wailing tones, as if she would unburthen her heart by pouring
into his unconscious ear her tale of desolation and woe.

Catharine was always very particular and punctual in performing her
personal ablutions, and she intimated to Indiana that it was good for her
to do the same; but the young girl seemed reluctant to follow her example,
till daily custom had reconciled her to what she evidently at first
regarded as an unnecessary ceremony; but she soon took pleasure in dressing
her dark hair, and suffering Catharine to braid it, and polish it till it
looked glossy and soft. Indiana in her turn would adorn Catharine with the
wings of the blue-bird or red-bird, the crest of the wood-duck, or quill
feathers of the golden-winged flicker, which is called in the Indian tongue
the shot-bird, in allusion to the round spots on its cream-coloured breast:
[Footnote: The Golden-winged Flicker belongs to a sub-genus of woodpeckers;
it is very handsome, and is said to be eatable; it lives on fruits and
insects.] but it was not in these things alone she showed her grateful
sense of the sisterly kindness that her young hostess showed to her; she
soon learned to lighten her labours in every household work, and above all,
she spent her time most usefully in manufacturing clothing from the skins
of the wild animals, and in teaching Catharine how to fit and prepare them;
but these were the occupation of the winter months. I must not forestall my
narrative.




CHAPTER VII.

"Go to the ant."--_Proverbs._

IT was now the middle of September: the weather, which had continued serene
and beautiful for some time, with dewy nights and misty mornings, began to
show symptoms of the change of season usual at the approach of the equinox.
Sudden squalls of wind, with hasty showers, would come sweeping over the
lake; the nights and mornings were damp and chilly. Already the tints of
autumn were beginning to crimson the foliage of the oaks, and where the
islands were visible, the splendid colours of the maple shone out in
gorgeous contrast with the deep verdure of the evergreens and light
golden-yellow of the poplar; but lovely as they now looked, they had not
yet reached the meridian of their beauty, which a few frosty nights at
the close of the month was destined to bring to perfection--a glow of
splendour to gladden the eye for a brief space, before the rushing winds
and rains of the following month were to sweep them away, and scatter them
abroad upon the earth.

One morning, just after a night of heavy rain and wind, the two boys went
down to see if the lake was calm enough for trying the raft, which Louis
had finished before the coming on of the bad weather. The water was rough
and crested with mimic waves, and they felt not disposed to launch the
raft on so stormy a surface, but they stood looking out over the lake and
admiring the changing foliage, when Hector pointed out to his cousin a dark
speck dancing on the waters, between the two nearest islands. The wind,
which blew very strong still from the north-east, brought the object nearer
every minute. At first they thought it might be a pine-branch that was
floating on the surface, when as it came bounding over the waves, they
perceived that it was a birch-canoe, but impelled by no visible arm. It was
a strange sight upon that lonely lake to see a vessel of any kind afloat,
and, on first deciding that it was a canoe, the boys were inclined to hide
themselves among the bushes, for fear of the Indians, but curiosity got the
better of their fears.

"The owner of yonder little craft is either asleep or absent from her; for
I see no paddle, and it is evidently drifting without any one to guide it,"
said Hector, after intently watching the progress of the tempest-driven
vessel; assured as it approached nearer that such was the case, they
hurried to the beach just as a fresh gust had lodged the canoe among the
branches of a fallen cedar which projected out some way into the water.

By creeping along the trunk of the tree, and trusting at times to the
projecting boughs, Louis, who was the most active and the lightest of
weight, succeeded in getting within reach of the canoe, and with some
trouble and the help of a stout branch that Hector handed to him, he
contrived to moor her in safety on the shore, taking the precaution of
hauling her well up on the shingle, lest the wind and water should set her
afloat again. "Hec, there is something in this canoe, the sight of which
will gladden your heart," cried Louis with a joyful look. "Come quickly,
and see my treasures."

"Treasures! You may well call them treasures," exclaimed Hector, as he
helped Louis to examine the contents of the canoe, and place them on the
shore, side by side.

The boys could hardly find words to express their joy and surprise at the
discovery of a large jar of parched rice, a tomahawk, an Indian blanket
almost as good as new, a large mat rolled up with a bass bark rope several
yards in length wound round it, and what was more precious than all,
an iron three-legged pot in which was a quantity of Indian corn. These
articles had evidently constituted the stores of some Indian hunter or
trapper; possibly the canoe had been imperfectly secured and had drifted
from its moorings during the gale of the previous night, unless by some
accident the owner had fallen into the lake and been drowned; this was of
course only a matter of conjecture on which it was useless to speculate,
and the boys joyfully took possession of the good fortune that had so
providentially been wafted, as it were, to their very feet.

"It was a capital chance for us, that old cedar having been blown down last
night just where it was," said Louis; "for if the canoe had not been drawn
into the eddy, and stopped by the branches, we might have lost it. I
trembled when I saw the wind driving it on so rapidly that it would founder
in the deep water, or go off to Long Island."

"I think we should have got it at Pine-tree Point," said Hector, "but I am
glad it was lodged so cleverly among the cedar boughs. I was half afraid
you would have fallen in once or twice, when you were trying to draw it
nearer to the shore." "Never fear for me, my friend; I can cling like a
wild cat when I climb. But what a grand pot! What delightful soups, and
stews, and boils, Catharine will make! Hurrah!" and Louis tossed up his new
fur cap, that he had made with great skill from an entire fox skin, in the
air, and cut sundry fantastic capers which Hector gravely condemned as
unbecoming his mature age; (Louis was turned of fifteen;) but with the
joyous spirit of a little child he sung, and danced, and laughed, and
shouted, till the lonely echoes of the islands and far-off hills returned
the unusual sound, and even his more steady cousin caught the infection,
and laughed to see Louis so elated.

Leaving Hector to guard the prize, Louis ran gaily off to fetch Catharine
to share his joy, and come and admire the canoe, and the blanket, and the
tripod, and the corn, and the tomahawk. Indiana accompanied them to the
lake shore, and long and carefully she examined the canoe and its contents,
and many were the plaintive exclamations she uttered as she surveyed the
things piece by piece, till she took notice of the broken handle of an
Indian paddle which lay at the bottom of the vessel; this seemed to afford
some solution to her of the mystery, and by broken words and signs she
intimated that the paddle had possibly broken in the hand of the Indian,
and that in endeavouring to regain the other part, he had lost his balance
and been drowned. She showed Hector a rude figure of a bird engraved with
some sharp instrument, and rubbed in with a blue colour. This, she said,
was the totem or crest of the chief of the tribe, and was meant to
represent a _crow_. The canoe had belonged to a chief of that name. While
they were dividing the contents of the canoe among them to be carried to
the shanty, Indiana, taking up the bass-rope and the blanket, bundled up
the most of the things, and adjusting the broad thick part of the rope to
the front of her head, she bore off the burden with great apparent ease, as
a London or Edinburgh porter would his trunks and packages, turning round
with a merry glance and repeating some Indian words with a lively air as
she climbed with apparent ease the steep bank, and soon distanced her
companions, to her great enjoyment. That night, Indiana cooked some of the
parched rice, Indian fashion, with venison, and they enjoyed the novelty
very much--it made an excellent substitute for bread, of which they had
been so long deprived.

Indiana gave them to understand that the rice harvest would soon be ready
on the lake, and that now they had got a canoe, they would go out and
gather it, and so lay by a store to last them for many months.

This little incident furnished the inhabitants of the shanty with frequent
themes for discussion. Hector declared that the Indian corn was the most
valuable of their acquisitions. "It will insure us a crop, and bread and
seed-corn for many years," he said; he also highly valued the tomahawk, as
his axe was worn and blunt.

Louis was divided between the iron pot and the canoe. Hector seemed to
think the raft, after all, might have formed a substitute for the latter;
besides, Indiana had signified her intention of helping him to make a
canoe. Catharine declared in favour of the blanket, as it would make, after
thorough ablutions, warm petticoats with tight bodices for herself and
Indiana. With deer-skin leggings, and a fur jacket, they should be
comfortably clad. Indiana thought the canoe the most precious, and was
charmed with the good jar and the store of rice: nor did she despise the
packing rope, which she soon showed was of use in carrying burdens from
place to place, Indian fashion: by placing a pad of soft fur in front of
the head, she could carry heavy loads with great ease. The mat, she said,
was useful for drying the rice she meant to store. The very next day after
this adventure, the two girls set to work, and with the help of Louis's
large knife, which was called into requisition as a substitute for
scissors, they cut out the blanket dresses, and in a short time made two
comfortable and not very unsightly garments: the full, short, plaited
skirts reached a little below the knee; light vests bordered with fur
completed the upper part, and leggings, terminated at the ankles by knotted
fringes of the doe-skin, with mocassins turned over with a band of squirrel
fur, completed the novel but not very unbecoming costume; and many a glance
of innocent satisfaction did our young damsels cast upon each other, when
they walked forth in the pride of girlish vanity to display their dresses
to Hector and Louis, who, for their parts, regarded them as most skilful
dress-makers, and were never tired of admiring and commending their
ingenuity in the cutting, making and fitting, considering what rude
implements they were obliged to use in the cutting out and sewing of the
garments.

The extensive rice beds on the lake had now begun to assume a golden tinge
which contrasted very delightfully with the deep blue waters--looking, when
lighted up by the sunbeams, like islands of golden-coloured sand. The ears,
heavy laden with the ripe grain, drooped towards the water. The time of
the rice-harvest was at hand, and with light and joyous hearts our young
adventurers launched the canoe, and, guided in their movements by the
little squaw, paddled to the extensive aquatic fields to gather it in,
leaving Catharine and Wolfe to watch their proceedings from the raft, which
Louis had fastened to a young tree that projected out over the lake, and
which made a good landing-place, likewise a wharf where they could stand
and fish very comfortably. As the canoe could not be overloaded on account
of the rice-gathering, Catharine very readily consented to employ herself
with fishing from the raft till their return.

The manner of procuring the rice was very simple. One person steered the
canoe with the aid of the paddle along the edge of the rice beds, and
another with a stick in one hand, and a curved sharp-edged paddle in the
other, struck the heads off as they bent them over the edge of the stick;
the chief art was in letting the heads fall into the canoe, which a little
practice soon enabled them to do as expertly as the mower lets the grass
fall in ridges beneath his scythe.

Many bushels of wild rice were thus collected. Nothing could he more
delightful than this sort of work to our young people, and merrily they
worked, and laughed, and sung, as they came home each day with their light
bark, laden with a store of grain that they knew would preserve them from
starving through the long, dreary winter that was coming on.

The canoe was a source of great comfort and pleasure to them; they were now
able to paddle out into the deep water, and fish for masquinonje and black
bass, which they caught in great numbers.

Indiana seemed quite another creature when, armed with a paddle of her own
carving, she knelt at the head of the canoe and sent it flying over the
water; then her dark eyes, often so vacant and glassy, sparkled with
delight, and her teeth gleamed with ivory whiteness as her face broke into
smiles and dimples.

It was delightful then to watch this child of nature, and see how
innocently happy she could be when rejoicing in the excitement of healthy
exercise, and elated by a consciousness of the power she possessed of
excelling her companions in feats of strength and skill which they had yet
to acquire by imitating her.

Even Louis was obliged to confess that the young savage knew more of
the management of a canoe, and the use of the bows and arrows, and the
fishing-line, than either himself or his cousin. Hector was lost in
admiration of her skill in all these things; and Indiana rose highly in his
estimation, the more he saw of her usefulness.

"Every one to his craft," said Louis, laughing; "the little squaw has been
brought up in the knowledge and practice of such matters from her babyhood;
perhaps if we were to set her to knitting, and spinning, and milking of
cows, and house-work, and learning to read, I doubt if she would prove half
as quick as Catharine or Mathilde."

"I wonder if she knows anything of God or our Saviour," said Hector,
thoughtfully.

"Who should have taught her? for the Indians are all heathens;" replied
Louis.

"I have heard my dear mother say, the Missionaries have taken great pains
to teach the Indian children down about Quebec and Montreal, and that so
far from being stupid, they learn very readily," said Catharine.

"We must try and make Indiana learn to say her prayers; she sits quite
still, and seems to take no notice of what we are doing when we kneel down,
before we go to bed," observed Hector.

"She cannot understand what we say," said Catharine; for she knows so
little of our language yet, that of course she cannot comprehend the
prayers, which are in other sort of words than what we use in speaking of
hunting, and fishing, and cooking, and such matters."

"Well, when she knows more of our way of speaking, then we must teach her;
it is a sad thing for Christian children to live with an untaught pagan,"
said Louis, who, being rather bigoted in his creed, felt a sort of
uneasiness in his own mind at the poor girl's total want of the rites of
his church; but Hector and Catharine regarded her ignorance with feelings
of compassionate interest, and lost no opportunity that offered, of trying
to enlighten her darkened mind on the subject of belief in the God who
made, and the Lord who saved them. Simply and earnestly they entered into
the task as a labour of love, and though for a long time Indiana seemed to
pay little attention to what they said, by slow degrees the good seed took
root and brought forth fruit worthy of Him whose Spirit poured the beams of
spiritual light into her heart: but my young readers must not imagine
these things were the work of a day--the process was slow, and so were the
results, but they were good in the end.

And Catharine was glad when, after many go months of patient teaching, the
Indian girl asked permission to kneel down with her white friend, and pray
to the Great Spirit and His Son in the same words that Christ Jesus gave
to his disciples; and if the full meaning of that holy prayer, so full of
humility and love, and moral justice, was not fully understood by her whose
lips repeated it, yet even the act of worship and the desire to do that
which she had been told was right, was, doubtless, a sacrifice better than
the pagan rites which that young girl had witnessed among her father's
people, who, blindly following the natural impulse of man in his depraved
nature, regarded deeds of blood and cruelty as among the highest of human
virtues, and gloried in those deeds of vengeance at which the Christian
mind revolts with horror.

Indiana took upon herself the management of the rice, drying, husking and
storing it, the two lads working under her direction. She caused several
forked stakes to be cut and sharpened and driven into the ground; on these
were laid four poles, so as to form a frame, over which she then stretched
the bass-mat, which she secured by means of forked pegs to the frame on
the mat; she then spread out the rice thinly, and lighted a fire beneath,
taking good care not to let the flame set fire to the mat, the object being
rather to keep up a strong, slow heat, by means of the red embers. She next
directed the boys to supply her with pine or cedar boughs, which she stuck
in close together, so as to enclose the fire within the area of the stakes.
This was done to concentrate the heat and cause it to bear upwards with
more power; the rice being frequently stirred with a sort of long-handled,
flat shovel. After the rice was sufficiently dried, the next thing to be
done was separating it from the husk, and this was effected by putting it
by small quantities into the iron pot, and with a sort of wooden pestle
or beetle, rubbing it round and round against the sides. [Footnote: The
Indians often make use of a very rude, primitive sort of mortar, by
hollowing out a bass-wood stump, and rubbing the rice with a wooden
pounder.] If they had not had the iron pot, a wooden trough must have been
substituted in its stead.

When the rice was husked, the loose chaff was winnowed from it in a flat
basket like a sieve, and it was then put by in coarse birch baskets,
roughly sewed with leather-wood bark, or bags made of matting, woven by the
little squaw from the cedar-bark. A portion was also parched, which was
simply done by putting the rice dry into the iron pot, and setting it on
hot embers, stirring the grain till it burst: it was then stored by for
use. Rice thus prepared is eaten dry, as a substitute for bread, by the
Indians. The lake was now swarming with wild fowl of various kinds; crowds
of ducks were winging their way across it from morning till night, floating
in vast flocks upon its surface, or rising in noisy groups if an eagle or
fish-hawk appeared sailing with slow, majestic circles above them, then
settling down with noisy splash upon the calm water. The shores, too, were
covered with these birds, feeding on the fallen acorns which fell ripe and
brown with every passing breeze; the berries of the dogwood also furnished
them with food; but the wild rice seemed the great attraction, and small
shell-fish and the larvae of many insects that had been dropped into the
waters, there to come to perfection in due season, or to form a provision
for myriads of wild fowl that had come from the far north-west to feed upon
them, guided by that instinct which has so beautifully been termed by one
of our modern poetesses, "God's gift to the weak" [Footnote: Mrs. Southey.]




CHAPTER VIII.

"Oh, come and hear what cruel wrongs Befel the Dark Ladye."--COLERIDGE.

THE Mohawk girl was in high spirits at the coming of the wild fowl to the
lake; she would clap her hands and laugh with almost childish glee as she
looked at them darkening the lake like clouds resting on its surface.

"If I had but my father's gun, his good old gun, now!" would Hector say, as
he eyed the timorous flocks as they rose and fell upon the lake; "but these
foolish birds are so shy, that they are away before an arrow can reach
them."

Indiana smiled in her quiet way; she was busy filling the canoe with green
boughs, which she arranged so as completely to transform the little vessel
into the semblance of a floating island of evergreen; within this bower she
motioned Hector to crouch down, leaving a small space for the free use of
his bow, while concealed at the prow she gently and noiselessly paddled the
canoe from the shore among the rice-beds, letting it remain stationary or
merely rocking to and fro with the undulatory motion of the waters. The
unsuspecting birds, deceived into full security, eagerly pursued their
pastime or their prey, and it was no difficult matter for the hidden archer
to hit many a black duck or teal or whistlewing, as it floated securely on
the placid water, or rose to shift its place a few yards up or down the
stream. Soon the lake around was strewed with the feathered game, which
Wolfe, cheered on by Lewis, who was stationed on the shore, brought to
land.

Indiana told Hector that this was the season when the Indians made great
gatherings on the lake for duck-shooting, which they pursued much after the
same fashion as that which has been described, only instead of one, a dozen
or more canoes would be thus disguised with boughs, with others stationed
at different parts of the lake, or under the shelter of the island, to
collect the birds. This sport was generally finished by a great feast.

The Indians offered the first of the birds as an oblation to the Great
Spirit, as a grateful acknowledgment of his bounty in having allowed them
to gather food thus plentifully for their families; sometimes distant
tribes with whom they were on terms of friendship were invited to share the
sport and partake of the spoils. Indiana could not understand why Hector
did not follow the custom of her Indian fathers, and offer the first duck
or the best fish to propitiate the Great Spirit. Hector told her that the
God he worshipped desired no sacrifice; that his holy Son, when he came
down from heaven and gave himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the world,
had satisfied his Father, the Great Spirit, an hundred-fold.

They feasted now continually upon the waterfowl, and Catharine learned from
Indiana how to skin them, and so preserve the feathers for making tippets,
and bonnets, and ornamental trimmings, which are not only warm, but light
and very becoming. They split open any of the birds that they did not
require for present consumption, and these they dried for winter store,
smoking some after the manner that the Shetlanders and Orkney people smoke
the solan geese: their shanty displayed an abundant store of provisions,
fish, flesh, and fowl, besides baskets of wild rice, and bags of dried
fruit.

One day Indiana came in from the brow of the hill, and told the boys that
the lake eastward was covered with canoes; she showed, by holding up her
two hands and then three fingers, that she had counted thirteen. The tribes
had met for the annual duck-feast, and for the rice harvest. She advised
them to put out the fire, so that no smoke might be seen to attract them;
but said they would not leave the lake for hunting over the plains just
then, as the camp was lower down on the point [Footnote: This point,
commonly known as _Anderson's Point_, now the seat of the Indian village,
used in former times to be a great place of rendezvous for the Indians,
and was the site of a murderous carnage or massacre that took place about
eighty years ago; the war-weapons and bones of the Indians are often turned
up with the plough at this day.] east of the mouth of a big river, which
she called "Otonabee."

Hector asked Indiana if she would go away and leave them, in the event of
meeting with any of her own tribe. The girl cast her eyes on the earth in
silence; a dark cloud seemed to gather over her face.

"If they should prove to be any of your father's people, or a friendly
tribe, would you go away with them?" he again repeated, to which she
solemnly replied,

"Indiana has no father, no tribe, no people; no blood of her father's warms
the heart of any man, woman or child, saving myself alone; but Indiana is
a brave, and the daughter of a brave, and will not shrink from danger: her
heart is warm; red blood flows warm here," and she laid her hand on her
heart. Then lifting up her hand, she said with slow but impassioned tone,
"They left not one drop of living blood to flow in any veins but these,"
and her eyes were raised, and her arms stretched upwards towards heaven, as
though calling down vengeance on the murderers of her father's house.

"My father was a Mohawk, the son of a great chief, who owned these
hunting-grounds far as your eye can see to the rising and setting sun,
along the big waters of the big lakes; but the Ojebwas, a portion of the
Chippewa nation, by treachery cut off my father's people by hundreds in
cold blood, when they were defenceless and at rest. It was a bloody day and
a bloody deed."

Instead of hiding herself, as Hector and Louis strongly advised the young
Mohawk to do, she preferred remaining as a scout, she said, under the cover
of the bushes on the edge of the steep that overlooked the lake, to watch
their movements. She told Hector to be under no apprehension if the Indians
came to the hut; not to attempt to conceal themselves, but offer them food
to eat and water to drink. "If they come to the house and find you away,
they will take your stores and burn your roof, suspecting that you are
afraid to meet them openly; but they will not harm you if you meet them
with open hand and fearless brow: if they eat of your bread, they will not
harm you; me they would kill by a cruel death--the war-knife is in their
heart against the daughter of the _brave_."

The boys thought Indiana's advice good, and they felt no fear for
themselves, only for Catharine, whom they counselled to remain in the
shanty with Wolfe.

The Indians seemed intent only on the sport which they had come to enjoy,
seeming in high glee, and as far as they could see quite peaceably
disposed; every night they returned to the camp on the north side, and the
boys could see their fires gleaming among the trees on the opposite shore,
and now and then in the stillness of the evening their wild shouts of
revelry would come faintly to their ears, borne by the breeze over the
waters of the lake.

The allusion that Indiana had made to her own history, though conveyed in
broken and hardly intelligible language, had awakened feelings of deep
interest for her in the breasts of her faithful friends. Many months
after this she related to her wondering auditors the fearful story of the
massacre of her kindred, and which I may as well relate, as I have raised
the curiosity of my youthful readers, though to do so I must render it in
my own language, as the broken half-formed sentences in which its facts
were conveyed to the ears of my Canadian Crusoes would be unintelligible to
my young friends. [Footnote: The facts of this narrative were gathered from
the lips of the eldest son of a Rice Lake chief. I have preferred giving it
in the present form, rather than as the story of the Indian girl. Simple as
it is, it is matter of history.]

There had been for some time a jealous feeling existing between the chiefs
of two principal tribes of the Ojebwas and the Mohawks, which like a
smothered fire had burnt in the heart of each, without having burst into a
decided blaze--for each strove to compass his ends and obtain the advantage
over the other by covert means. The tribe of the Mohawks of which I now
speak, claimed the southern shores of the Rice Lake for their hunting
grounds, and certain islands and parts of the lake for fishing, while that
of the Ojebwas considered themselves masters of the northern shores and
certain rights of water beside. Possibly it was about these rights that the
quarrel originated, but if so, it was not openly avowed between the "Black
Snake," (that was the totem borne by the Mohawk chief,) and the "Bald
Eagle" (the totem of the Ojebwa).

These chiefs had each a son, and the Bald Eagle had also a daughter of
great and rare beauty, called by her people, "The Beam of the Morning;" she
was the admiration of Mohawks as well as Ojebwas, and many of the young men
of both the tribes had sought her hand, but hitherto in vain. Among
her numerous suitors, the son of the Black Snake seemed to be the most
enamoured of her beauty; and it was probably with some intention of winning
the favour of the young Ojebwa squaw for his son, that the Black Snake
accepted the formal invitation of the Bald Eagle to come to his hunting
grounds during the rice harvest, and shoot deer and ducks on the lake, and
to ratify a truce which had been for some time set on foot between them;
but while outwardly professing friendship and a desire for peace, inwardly
the fire of hatred burned fiercely in the breast of the Black Snake against
the Ojebwa chief and his only son, a young man of great promise, renowned
among his tribe as a great hunter and warrior, but who had once offended
the Mohawk chief by declining a matrimonial alliance with one of the
daughters of a chief of inferior rank, who was closely connected to him
by marriage. This affront rankled in the heart of the Black Snake, though
outwardly he affected to have forgiven and forgotten the slight that had
been put upon his relative. The hunting had been carried on for some days
very amicably, when one day the Bald Eagle was requested, with all due
attention to Indian etiquette, to go to the wigwam of the Black Snake. On
entering the lodge, he perceived the Mohawk strangely disordered; he rose
from his mat, on which he had been sleeping, with a countenance fearfully
distorted, his eyes glaring hideously, his whole frame convulsed, and
writhing as in fearful bodily anguish, and casting himself upon the ground,
he rolled and grovelled on the earth, uttering frightful yells and groans.

The Bald Eagle was moved at the distressing state in which he found his
guest, and asked the cause of his disorder, but this the other refused to
tell. After some hours the fit appeared to subside, but the chief remained
moody and silent. The following day the same scene was repeated, and on the
third, when the fit seemed to have increased in bodily agony, with great
apparent reluctance, wrung seemingly from him by the importunity of his
host, he consented to reveal the cause, which was, that the Bad Spirit had
told him that these bodily tortures could not cease till the only son of
his friend, the Ojebwa chief, had been sacrificed to appease his anger--
neither could peace long continue between the two nations until this deed
had been done; and not only must the chief's son be slain, but he must be
pierced by his own father's hand, and his flesh served up at a feast at
which the father must preside. The Black Snake affected the utmost horror
and aversion at so bloody and unnatural a deed being committed to save his
life and the happiness of his tribe, but the peace was to be ratified for
ever if the sacrifice was made,--if not, war to the knife was to be ever
between the Mohawks and Ojebwas.

The Bald Eagle seeing that his treacherous guest would make this an
occasion of renewing a deadly warfare, for which possibly he was not at the
time well prepared, assumed a stoical calmness, and replied,

"Be it so; great is the power of the Bad Spirit to cause evil to the tribes
of the chiefs that rebel against his will. My son shall be sacrificed by my
hand, that the evil one may be appeased, and that the Black Snake's body
may have ease, and his people rest beside the fires of their lodges in
peace."

"The Bald Eagle has spoken like a chief with a large heart," was the
specious response of the wily Mohawk; "moreover, the Good Spirit also
appeared, and said, 'Let the Black Snake's son and the Bald Eagle's
daughter become man and wife, that peace may be found to dwell among the
lodges, and the war-hatchet be buried for ever.'"

"The Beam of the Morning shall become the wife of the Young Pine," was the
courteous answer; but stern revenge lay deep hidden beneath the unmoved
brow and passionless lip.

The fatal day arrived; the Bald Eagle, with unflinching hand and eye that
dropped no human tear of sorrow for the son of his love, plunged the weapon
into his heart with Spartan-like firmness. The fearful feast of human flesh
was prepared, and that old chief, pale but unmoved, presided over the
ceremonies. The war-dance was danced round the sacrifice, and all went
off well, as if no such fearful rite had been enacted: but a fearful
retribution was at hand. The Young Pine sought the tent of the Bald Eagle's
daughter that evening, and was received with all due deference, as a son
of so great a chief as the Black Snake merited; he was regarded now as
a successful suitor, and intoxicated with the beauty of the Beam of the
Morning, pressed her to allow the marriage to take place in a few days.
The bride consented, and a day was named for the wedding feast to be
celebrated, and that due honour might be given to so great an event,
invitations were sent out to the principal families of the Mohawk tribe,
and these amounted to several hundreds of souls, while the young Ojebwa
hunters were despatched up the river and to different parts of the country,
avowedly to collect venison, beaver, and other delicacies to regale their
guests, but in reality to summon by means of trusty scouts a large war
party from the small lakes, to be in readiness to take part in the deadly
revenge that was preparing for their enemies.

Meantime the squaws pitched the nuptial tent, and prepared the bridal
ornaments. A large wigwam capable of containing all the expected guests was
then constructed, adorned with the thick branches of evergreens so artfully
contrived as to be capable of concealing the armed Ojebwas and their
allies, who in due time were introduced beneath this leafy screen, armed
with the murderous tomahawk and scalping-knife with which to spring upon
their defenceless and unsuspecting guests. According to the etiquette
always observed upon such occasions, all deadly weapons were left outside
the tent. The bridegroom had been conducted with songs and dancing to the
tent of the bride. The guests, to the number of several hundred naked and
painted warriors were assembled. The feast was declared to be ready; a
great iron pot or kettle occupied the centre of the tent. According to the
custom of the Indians, the father of the bridegroom was invited to lift
the most important dish from the pot, whilst the warriors commenced their
wardance around him. This dish was usually a bear's head, which was
fastened to a string left for the purpose of raising it from the pot.

"Let the Black Snake, the great chief of the Mohawks, draw up the head and
set it on the table, that his people may eat and make merry, and that his
wise heart may be glad;" were the scornful words of the Bald Eagle.

A yell of horror burst from the lips of the horror-stricken father, as
he lifted to view the fresh and gory head of his only son, the _happy_
bridegroom of the lovely daughter of the Ojebwa chief.

"Ha!" shouted the Bald Eagle, "is the great chief of the Mohawks a squaw,
that his blood grows white and his heart trembles at the sight of his son,
the bridegroom of the Beam of the Morning? The Bald Eagle gave neither sigh
nor groan when he plunged the knife into the heart of his child. Come,
brother, take the knife; taste the flesh and drink the blood of thy son:
the Bald Eagle shrank not when you bade him partake of the feast that was
prepared from his young warrior's body." The wretched father dashed himself
upon the earth, while his cries and howlings rent the air; those cries were
answered by the war-whoop of the ambushed Ojebwas, as they sprang to their
feet, and with deafening yells attacked the guests, who, panic-stricken,
naked and defenceless, fell an easy prey to their infuriated enemies. Not
one living foe escaped to tell the tale of that fearful marriage feast. A
second Judith had the Indian girl proved. It was her plighted hand that had
severed the head of her unsuspecting bridegroom to complete the fearful
vengeance that had been devised in return for the merciless and horrible
murder of her brother.

Nor was the sacrifice yet finished, for with fearful cries the Indians
seized upon the canoes of their enemies, and with the utmost speed, urged
by unsatisfied revenge, hurried down the lake to an island where the women
and children and such of the aged or young men as were not included among
the wedding guests, were encamped in unsuspecting security. Panic-stricken,
the Mohawks offered no resistance, but fell like sheep appointed for the
slaughter: the Ojebwas slew there the grey-head with the infant of days.
But while the youths and old men tamely yielded to their enemies, there was
one, whose spirit roused to fury by the murder of her father, armed herself
with the war club and knife, and boldly withstood the successful warriors.
At the door of the tent of the slaughtered chief the Amazon defended her
children: while the war lightning kindled in her dark eye, she called aloud
in scornful tones to her people to hide themselves in the tents of their
women, who alone were _braves_, and would fight their battles. Fiercely she
taunted the men, but they shrank from the unequal contest, and she alone
was found to deal the death-blow upon the foe, till overpowered with
numbers, and pierced with frightful wounds, she fell singing her own
death-song and raising the wail for the dead who lay around her. Night
closed in, but the work of blood still continued, till not a victim was
found, and again they went forth on their exterminating work. Lower down
they found another encampment, and there also they slew all the inhabitants
of the lodges; they then returned back to the island, to gather together
their dead and collect the spoils of their tents. They were weary with
the fatigue of the slaughter of that fearful day; they were tired of
blood-shedding; the retribution had satisfied even their love of blood: and
when they found, on returning to the spot where the heroine had stood at
bay, one young solitary female sitting beside the corpse of that dauntless
woman, her mother, they led her away, and did all that their savage nature
could suggest to soften her anguish and dry her tears. They brought her
to the tents of their women, and clothed and fed her, and bade her
be comforted; but her young heart burned within her, and she refused
consolation. She could not forget the wrongs of her people: she was the
only living creature left of the Mohawks on that island. The young girl
was Indiana, the same whom Hector Maxwell had found, wounded and bound, to
perish with hunger and thirst on Bare-hill.

Brooding with revenge in her heart, the young girl told them that she had
stolen unperceived into the tent of the Bald Eagle, and aimed a knife at
his throat, but the fatal blow was arrested by one of the young men, who
had watched her enter the old chiefs tent. A council was called, and she
was taken to Bare-hill, bound, and left in the sad state already described.

It was with feelings of horror and terror that the Christian children
listened to this fearful tale, and Indiana read in their averted eyes and
pale faces the feelings with which the recital of the tale of blood had
inspired them. And then it was that as they sat beneath the shade of the
trees, in the soft misty light of an Indian summer moon, that Catharine,
with simple earnestness, taught her young disciple those heavenly lessons
of mercy and forgiveness which her Redeemer had set forth by his life, his
doctrines, and his death.

And she told her, that if she would see that Saviour's face in Heaven, and
dwell with him in joy and peace for ever, she must learn to pray for those
dreadful men who had made her fatherless and motherless, and her home a
desolation; that the fire of revenge must be quenched within her heart, and
the spirit of love alone find place within it, or she could not become the
child of God and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven. How hard were these
conditions to the young heathen,--how contrary to her nature, to all that
she had been taught in the tents of her fathers, where revenge was virtue,
and to take the scalp of an enemy a glorious thing!

Yet when she contrasted the gentle, kind, and dovelike characters of her
Christian friends, with the fierce bloody people of her tribe and of her
Ojebwa enemies, she could not but own they were more worthy of love and
admiration: had they not found her a poor miserable trembling captive,
unbound her, fed and cherished her, pouring the balm of consolation into
her wounded heart, and leading her in bands of tenderest love to forsake
those wild and fearful passions that warred in her soul, and bringing her
to the feet of the Saviour, to become his meek and holy child, a lamb of
his "extended fold?"*

[*Footnote: The Indian who related this narrative to me was a son of a
Rice Lake chief, Mosang Poudash by name, who vouched for its truth as an
historic fact remembered by his father, whose grandsire had been one of the
actors in the massacre. Mosang Poudash promised to write down the legend,
and did so in part, but made such confusion between his imperfect English
and Indian language, that the MS. was unavailable for copying.]




CHAPTER IX.

"The horn of the hunter is heard on the hill"
  _Irish Song._

WHILE the Indians were actively pursuing their sports on the lake, shooting
wild fowl, and hunting and fishing by torch-light, so exciting was the
amusement of watching them, that the two lads, Hector and Louis, quite
forgot all sense of danger, in the enjoyment of lying or sitting on the
brow of the mount near the great ravine, and looking at their proceedings.
Once or twice the lads were near betraying themselves to the Indians, by
raising a shout of delight, at some skilful manoeuvre that excited their
unqualified admiration and applause.

At night, when the canoes had all retired to the camp on the north shore,
and all fear of detection had ceased for the time, they lighted up their
shanty fire, and cooked a good supper, and also prepared sufficiency of
food for the following day. The Indians remained for a fortnight; at the
end of that time Indiana, who was a watchful spy on their movements, told
Hector and Louis that the camp was broken up, and that the Indians had gone
up the river, and would not return again for some weeks. The departure of
the Indians was a matter of great rejoicing to Catharine, whose dread of
these savages had greatly increased since she had been made acquainted with
the fearful deeds which Indiana had described; and what reliance could
she feel in people who regarded deeds of blood and vengeance as acts of
virtuous heroism?

Once, and only once during their stay, the Indians had passed within a
short distance of their dwelling; but they were in full chase of a bear,
which had been seen crossing the deep ravine near Mount Ararat, and they
had been too intent upon their game to notice the shanty, or had taken it
for the shelter of some trapper if it had been seen, for they never turned
out of their path, and Catharine, who was alone at the time, drawing water
from the spring, was so completely concealed by the high bank above her,
that she had quite escaped their notice. Fortunately, Indiana gave the two
boys a signal to conceal themselves when she saw them enter the ravine; and
effectually hidden among the thick grey mossy trunks of the cedars at the
lake shore, they remained secure from molestation, while the Indian girl
dropped noiselessly down among the tangled thicket of wild vines and
brushwood, which she drew cautiously over her, and closed her eyes, lest,
as she naively remarked, their glitter should be seen and betray her to her
enemies.

It was a moment of intense anxiety to our poor wanderers, whose terrors
were more excited on behalf of the young Mohawk than for themselves, and
they congratulated her on her escape with affectionate warmth.

"Are my white brothers afraid to die?" was the young squaw's half-scornful
reply. "Indiana is the daughter of a brave; she fears not to die?"

The latter end of September, and the first week in October, had been stormy
and even cold. The rainy season, however, was now over; the nights were
often illuminated by the Aurora borealis, which might be seen forming
an arch of soft and lovely brightness over the lake, to the north and
north-eastern portions of the horizon, or shooting upwards, in ever-varying
shafts of greenish light, now hiding, now revealing the stars, which shone
with softened radiance through the silvery veil that dimmed their beauty.
Sometimes for many nights together the same appearance might be seen, and
was usually the forerunner of frosty weather, though occasionally it was
the precursor of cold winds, and heavy rains.

The Indian girl regarded it with superstitious feelings, but whether as an
omen for good or ill, she would not tell. On all matters connected with
her religions notions she was shy and reserved, though occasionally she
unconsciously revealed them. Thus the warnings of death or misfortunes were
revealed to her by certain ominous sounds in the woods, the appearance of
strange birds or animals, or the meanings of others. The screeching of the
owl, the bleating of the doe, or barking of the fox, were evil auguries,
while the flight of the eagle and the croaking of the raven were omens of
good. She put faith in dreams, and would foretel good or evil fortune from
them; she could read the morning and evening clouds, and knew from various
appearances of the sky, or the coming or departing of certain birds or
insects, changes in the atmosphere. Her ear was quick in distinguishing the
changes in the voices of the birds or animals; she knew the times of their
coming and going, and her eye was quick to see as her ear to detect sounds.
Her voice was soft, and low, and plaintive, and she delighted in imitating
the little ballads or hymns that Catharine sung; though she knew nothing of
their meaning, she would catch the tunes, and sing the song with Catharine,
touching the hearts of her delighted auditors by the melody and pathos of
her voice.

The season called Indian summer had now arrived: the air was soft and mild,
almost oppressively warm; the sun looked red as though seen through the
smoke clouds of a populous city. A soft blue haze hung on the bosom of the
glassy lake, which reflected on its waveless surface every passing shadow,
and the gorgeous tints of its changing woods on shore and island. Sometimes
the stillness of the air was relieved by a soft sighing wind, which rustled
the dying foliage as it swept by.

The Indian summer is the harvest of the Indian tribes. It is during this
season that they hunt and shoot the wild fowl that come in their annual
flights to visit the waters of the American lakes and rivers; it is then
that they gather in their rice, and prepare their winter stores of meat,
and fish, and furs. The Indian girl knew the season they would resort to
certain hunting grounds. They were constant, and altered not their customs;
as it was with their fathers, so it was with them.

Louis had heard so much of the Otonabee river from Indiana, that he was
impatient to go and explore the entrance, and the shores of the lake on
that side, which hitherto they had not ventured to do for fear of being
surprised by the Indians. "Some fine day," said Louis, "we will go out in
the canoe, explore the distant islands, and go up the river a little way."

Hector advised visiting all the islands by turns, beginning at the little
islet which looks in the distance like a boat in full sail; it is level
with the water, and has only three or four trees upon it. The name they had
given to it was "Ship Island." The Indians have some name for it which I
have forgotten; but it means, I have been told, "Witch Island." Hector's
plan met with general approbation, and they resolved to take provisions
with them for several days, and visit the islands and go up the river,
passing the night under the shelter of the thick trees on the shore
wherever they found a pleasant halting-place.

The weather was mild and warm, the lake was as clear and calm as a mirror,
and in joyous mood our little party embarked and paddled up the lake, first
to Ship Island, but this did not detain them many minutes; they then went
to Grape Island, which they so named from the abundance of wild vines, now
rich with purple clusters of the ripe grapes,--tart, but still not to be
despised by our young adventurers; and they brought away a large birch
basket heaped up with the fruit. "Ah, if we had but a good cake of maple
sugar, now, to preserve our grapes with, and make such grape jelly as my
mother makes!" said Louis.

"If we find out a sugar-bush we will manage to make plenty of sugar," said
Catharine; "there are maples not two hundred yards from the shanty, near
the side of the steep bank to the east. You remember the pleasant spot
which we named the Happy Valley, [Footnote: A lovely valley to the east of
Mount Ararat, now belonging to a worthy and industrious family of the name
of Brown. I wish Hector could see it as it now is,--a cultivated fertile
farm.] where the bright creek runs, dancing along so merrily, below the
pine-ridge?"

"Oh, yes, the same that winds along near the foot of Bare-hill, where the
water-cresses grow."

"Yes, where I gathered the milk-weed the other day."

"What a beautiful pasture-field that will make, when it is cleared!" said
Hector, thoughtfully.

"Hector is always planning about fields, and clearing great farms," said
Louis, laughing. "We shall see Hec a great man one of these days; I think
he has in his own mind brushed, and burned, and logged up all the fine
flats and table-land on the plains before now, ay, and cropped it all with
wheat, and peas, and Indian corn."

"We will have a clearing and a nice field of corn next year, if we live,"
replied Hector; "that corn that we found in the canoe will be a treasure."

"Yes, and the corn-cob you got on Bare-hill," said Catherine. "How lucky
we have been! We shall be so happy when we see our little field of corn
flourishing round the shanty! It was a good thing, Hec, that you went to
the Indian camp that day, though both Louis and I were very miserable while
you were absent; but you see, God must have directed you, that the life
of this poor girl might be saved, to be a comfort to us. Everything has
prospered well with us since she came to us. Perhaps it is because we try
to make a Christian of her, and so God blesses all our endeavours."

"We are told," said Hector, "that there is joy with the angels of God over
one sinner that repenteth; doubtless, it is a joyful thing when the heathen
that knew not the name of God are taught to glorify his holy name."

Indiana, while exploring, had captured a porcupine; she declared that she
should have plenty of quills for edging baskets and mocassins; beside, she
said, the meat was white and good to eat. Hector looked with a suspicious
eye upon the little animal, doubting the propriety of eating its flesh,
though he had learned to eat musk rats, and consider them good meat, baked
in Louis's Indian oven, or roasted on a forked stick, before the fire. The
Indian porcupine is a small animal, not a very great deal larger than the
common British hedgehog; the quills, however, are longer and stronger, and
varied with alternate clouded marks of pure white and dark brownish grey;
they are minutely barbed, so that if one enters the flesh it is with
difficulty extracted, but will work through of itself in an opposite
direction, and can then be easily pulled out. Dogs and cattle often suffer
great inconvenience from getting their muzzles filled with the quills of
the porcupine, the former when worrying the poor little animal, and
the latter by accidentally meeting a dead one among the herbage; great
inflammation will sometimes attend the extraction. Indians often lose
valuable hounds from this cause. Beside porcupines, Indiana told her
companions, there were some fine butter-nut trees on the island, and they
could collect a bag full in a very short time. This was good news, for the
butter-nut is sweet and pleasant, almost equal to the walnut, of which it
is a species. The day was passed pleasantly enough in collecting nuts and
grapes; but as this island did not afford any good cleared spot for passing
the night, and, moreover, was tenanted by black snakes, several of which
made their appearance among the stones near the edge of the water, they
agreed by common council to go to Long Island, where Indiana said there was
an old log-house, the walls of which were still standing, and where there
was dry moss in plenty, which would make them a comfortable bed for the
night. This old log-house she said had been built, she heard the Indians
say, by a French Canadian trapper, who used to visit the lake some years
ago; he was on friendly terms with the chiefs, who allowed him many
privileges, and he bought their furs, and took them down the lake, through
the river Trent, to some station-house on the great lake. They found they
should have time enough to land and deposit their nuts and grapes and
paddle to Long Island before sunset. Upon the western part of this fine
island they had several times landed and passed some hours, exploring its
shores; but Indiana told them, to reach the old log-house they must enter
the low swampy bay to the east, at an opening which she called Indian Cove.
To do this required some skill in the management of the canoe, which was
rather over-loaded for so light a vessel; and the trees grew so close and
thick that they had some difficulty in pushing their way through them
without injuring its frail sides. These trees or bushes were chiefly black
elder, high-bush cranberries, dogwood, willows, and, as they proceeded
further, and there was ground of a more solid nature, cedar, poplar, swamp
oak, and soft maple, with silver birch and wild cherries. Long strings of
silvery-grey tree-moss hung dangling over their heads, the bark and roots
of the birch and cedars were covered with a luxuriant growth of green moss,
but there was a dampness and closeness in this place that made it far from
wholesome, and the little band of voyagers were not very sorry when the
water became too shallow to admit of the canoe making its way through the
swampy channel, and they landed on the banks of a small circular pond, as
round as a ring, and nearly surrounded by tall trees, hoary with moss and
lichens; large water-lilies floated on the surface of this miniature lake,
and the brilliant red berries of the high-bush cranberry, and the purple
clusters of grapes, festooned the trees.

"A famous breeding place this must be for ducks," observed Louis.

"And for flowers," said Catharine, "and for grapes and cranberries. There
is always some beauty or some usefulness to be found, however lonely the
spot."

"A fine place for musk-rats, and minks, and fishes," said Hector, looking
round. "The old trapper knew what he was about when he made his lodge near
this pond. And there, sure enough, is the log-hut, and not so bad a
one either," and scrambling up the bank he entered the deserted little
tenement, well pleased to find it in tolerable repair. There were the
ashes on the stone hearth, just as it had been left years back by the old
trapper; some rough hewn shelves, a rude bedstead of cedar poles still
occupied a corner of the little dwelling; heaps of old dry moss and grass
lay upon the ground; and the little squaw pointed with one of her silent
laughs to a collection of broken egg-shells, where some wild duck had sat
and hatched her downy brood among the soft materials which she had found
and appropriated to her own purpose. The only things pertaining to the
former possessor of the log-hut were an old, rusty, battered tin pannikin,
now, alas! unfit for holding water; a bit of a broken earthen whisky jar; a
rusty nail, which Louis pounced upon, and pocketed, or rather pouched,--for
he had substituted a fine pouch of deer-skin for his worn-out pocket; and
a fishing-line of good stout cord, which was wound on a splinter of red
redar, and carefully stuck between one of the rafters and the roof of the
shanty. A rusty but efficient hook was attached to the line, and Louis,
who was the finder, was quite overjoyed at his good fortune in making so
valuable an addition to his fishing-tackle. Hector got only an odd worn-out
mocassin, which he chucked into the little pond in disdain; while Catharine
declared she would keep the old tin pot as a relic, and carefully deposited
it in the canoe.

As they made their way into the interior of the island, they found that
there were a great many fine sugar maples which had been tapped by some
one, as the boys thought, by the old trapper; but Indiana, on examining the
incisions in the trees, and the remnants of birch-bark vessels that lay
mouldering on the earth below them, declared them to have been the work
of her own people; and long and sadly did the young girl look upon these
simple memorials of a race of whom she was the last living remnant. The
young girl stood there in melancholy mood, a solitary, isolated being, with
no kindred tie upon the earth to make life dear to her; a stranger in the
land of her fathers, associating with those whose ways were not her ways,
nor their thoughts her thoughts; whose language was scarcely known to her,
whose God was not the God of her fathers. Yet the dark eyes of the Indian
girl were not dimmed with tears as she thought of these things; she had
learned of her people to suffer, and be still.

Silent and patient she stood, with her melancholy gaze bent on the earth,
when she felt the gentle hand of Catharine laid upon her arm, and then
kindly and lovingly passed round her neck, as she whispered,--

"Indiana, I will be to you as a sister, and will love you and cherish you,
because you are an orphan girl, and alone in the world; but God loves you,
and will make you happy. He is a Father to the fatherless, and the Friend
of the destitute, and to them that have no helper."

The words of kindness and love need no interpretation; no book-learning is
necessary to make them understood. The young, the old, the deaf, the dumb,
the blind, can read this universal language; its very silence is often more
eloquent than words--the gentle pressure of the hand, the half-echoed sigh,
the look of sympathy will penetrate to the very heart, and unlock its
hidden stores of human tenderness and love. The rock is smitten and the
waters gush forth, a bright and living stream, to refresh and fertilize the
thirsty soul. The heart of the poor mourner was touched; she bowed down her
head upon the hand that held her so kindly in its sisterly grasp, and wept
soft sweet human tears full of grateful love, while she whispered, in her
own low plaintive voice, "My white sister, I kiss you in my heart; I will
love the God of my white brothers, and be his child."

The two friends now busied themselves in preparing the evening meal: they
found Louis and Hector had lighted up a charming blaze on the desolate
hearth. A few branches of cedar twisted together by Catharine, made a
serviceable broom, with which she swept the floor, giving to the deserted
dwelling a neat and comfortable aspect; some big stones were quickly rolled
in, and made to answer for seats in the chimney corner. The new-found
fishing-line was soon put into requisition by Louis, and with very little
delay a fine dish of black bass, broiled on the coals, was added to their
store of dried venison and roasted bread-roots, which they found in
abundance on a low spot on the island. Grapes and butternuts which Hector
cracked with stones by way of nut-crackers, finished their sylvan meal. The
boys stretched themselves to sleep on the ground, with their feet, Indian
fashion, to the fire; while the two girls occupied the mossy couch which
they had newly spread with fragrant cedar and hemlock boughs.

The next island that claimed their attention was Sugar-Maple Island,
[Footnote: Sugar Island, a charming object from the picturesque cottage
of Alfred Hayward, Esq.] a fine, thickly-wooded island, rising with steep
rocky banks from the water. A beautiful object, but too densely wooded to
admit of our party penetrating beyond a few yards of its shores.

The next island they named the Beaver, [Footnote: The Beaver, commonly
called Sheep Island, from some person having pastured a few sheep upon it
some few years ago. I have taken the liberty of preserving the name, to
which it bears an obvious resemblance; the nose of the Beaver lies towards
the west, the tail to the east. This island is nearly opposite to Gore's
Landing, and forms a pleasing object from the windows and verandah of
Claverton, the house of my esteemed friend, William Falkner, Esq., the
Patriarch of the Plains, as he has often been termed; one of the only
residents on the Rice Lake plains for many years; one of the few gentlemen
who had taste enough to be charmed with this lovely tract of country, and
to appreciate its agricultural resources, which, of late, have been so
fully developed.] from its resemblance in shape to that animal. A fine,
high, oval island beyond this they named Black Island, [Footnote: Black
Island, the sixth from the head of the lake; an oval island, remarkable for
its evergreens.] from its dark evergreens; the next was that which seemed
most to excite the interest of their Indian guide, although but a small
stony island, scantily clothed with trees, lower down the lake. This place
she called Spooke Island, [Footnote: Appendix H.] which means in the
Indian tongue, a place for the dead; it is sometimes called Spirit Island,
and here, in times past, used the Indian people to bury their dead. The
island is now often the resort of parties of pleasure, who, from its being
grassy and open, find it more available than those which are densely
wooded. The young Mohawk regarded it with feelings of superstitious awe,
and would not suffer Hector to land the canoe on its rocky shores.

"It is a place of spirits," she said; "the ghosts of my fathers will be
angry if we go there." Even her young companions felt that, they were upon
sacred ground, and gazed with silent reverence upon the burial isle.

Strongly imbued with a love of the marvellous, which they had derived from
their Highland origin, Indiana's respect for the spirits of her ancestors
was regarded as most natural, and in silence, as if fearing to disturb the
solemnity of the spot, they resumed their paddles, and after awhile reached
the mouth of the river Otonabee, which was divided into two separate
channels by a long, low point of swampy land covered with stunted, mossy
bushes and trees, rushes, driftwood, and aquatic plants. Indiana told
them this river flowed from the north, and that it was many days' journey
up to the lakes; to illustrate its course, she drew with her paddle a long
line with sundry curves and broader spaces, some longer, some smaller, with
Bays and inlets, which she gave them to understand were the chain of lakes
that she spoke of. There were beautiful hunting grounds on the borders of
these lakes, and many fine water-falls and rocky islands; she had been
taken up to these waters during the time of her captivity. The Ojebwas, she
said, were a branch of the great Chippewa nation, who owned much land and
great waters thereabouts.

Compared with the creeks and streams that they had seen hitherto, the
Otonabee appeared a majestic river, and an object of great admiration and
curiosity, for it seemed to them as if it were the high road leading up
to an unknown far-off land--a land of dark, mysterious, impenetrable
forests,--flowing on, flowing on, in lonely majesty, reflecting on its
tranquil bosom the blue sky, the dark pines, and grey cedars,--the pure
ivory water-lily, and every passing shadow of bird or leaf that flitted
across its surface--so quiet was the onward flow of its waters.

A few brilliant leaves yet lingered on the soft maples and crimson-tinted
oaks, but the glory of the forest had departed; the silent fall of many a
sear and yellow leaf told of the death of summer and of winter's coming
reign. Yet the air was wrapt in a deceitful stillness; no breath of wind
moved the trees or dimpled the water. Bright wreaths of scarlet berries and
wild grapes hung in festoons among the faded foliage. The silence of the
forest was unbroken, save by the quick tapping of the little midland
wood-pecker, or the shrill scream of the blue jay; the whirring sound of
the large white and grey duck, (called by the frequenters of these lonely
waters the whistle-wing,) as its wings swept the waters in its flight; or
the light dripping of the paddle;--so still, so quiet was the scene.

As the day was now far advanced, the Indian girl advised them either to
encamp for the night on the river bank, or to use all speed in returning.
She seemed to view the aspect of the heavens with some anxiety. Vast
volumes of light copper-tinted clouds were rising, the sun seen through its
hazy veil looked red and dim, and a hot sultry air unrelieved by a breath
of refreshing wind oppressed our young voyagers; and though the same
coppery clouds and red sun had been seen for several successive days, a
sort of instinctive feeling prompted the desire in all to return; and after
a few minutes' rest and refreshment, they turned their little bark towards
the lake; and it was well that they did so: by the time they had reached
the middle of the lake, the stillness of the air was rapidly changing.
The rose-tinted clouds that had lain so long piled upon each other in
mountainous ridges, began to move upwards, at first slowly, then with
rapidly accelerated motion. There was a hollow moaning in the pine tops,
and by fits a gusty breeze swept the surface of the water, raising it into
rough, short, white-crested ridges.

These signs were pointed out by Indiana as the harbinger of a rising
hurricane; and now a swift spark of light like a falling star glanced on
the water, as if there to quench its fiery light. Again the Indian girl
raised her dark hand and pointed to the rolling storm-clouds, to the
crested, waters and the moving pine tops; then to the head of the Beaver
Island--it was the one nearest to them. With an arm of energy she wielded
the paddle, with an eye of fire she directed the course of their little
vessel, for well she knew their danger and the need for straining every
nerve to reach the nearest point of land. Low muttering peals of thunder
were now heard, the wind was rising with electric speed. Away flew the
light bark, with the swiftness of a bird, over the water; the tempest was
above, around and beneath. The hollow crash of the forest trees as they
bowed to the earth could be heard, sullenly sounding from shore to shore.
And now the Indian girl, flinging back her black streaming hair from her
brow, knelt at the head of the canoe, and with renewed vigour plied the
paddle. The waters, lashed into a state of turbulence by the violence of
the storm, lifted the canoe up and down, but no word was spoken--they each
felt the greatness of the peril, but they also knew that they were in the
hands of Him who can say to the tempest-tossed waves, "Peace, be still,"
and they obey Him.

Every effort was made to gain the nearest island; to reach the mainland
was impossible, for the rain poured down a blinding deluge; it was with
difficulty the little craft was kept afloat, by baling out the water; to do
this, Louis was fain to use his cap, and Catharine assisted with the old
tin-pot which she had fortunately brought from the trapper's shanty.

The tempest was at its height when they reached the nearest point of the
Beaver, and joyful was the grating sound of the canoe as it was vigorously
pushed up on the shingly beach, beneath the friendly shelter of the
overhanging trees, where, perfectly exhausted by the exertions they had
made, dripping with rain and overpowered by the terrors of the storm,
they threw themselves on the ground, and in safety watched its
progress--thankful for an escape from such imminent peril.

Thus ended the Indian summer--so deceitful in its calmness and its beauty.
The next day saw the ground white with snow, and hardened into stone by a
premature frost. Our poor voyagers were not long in quitting the shelter of
the Beaver Island, and betaking them once more to their ark of refuge--the
log-house on Mount Ararat.

The winter, that year, set in with unusual severity some weeks sooner than
usual, so that from the beginning of November to the middle of April the
snow never entirely left the ground. The lake was soon covered with ice,
and by the month of December it was one compact solid sheet from shore to
shore.




CHAPTER X.

  "Scared by the red and noisy light."--COLERIDGE.

Hector and Louis had now little employment, excepting chopping fire-wood,
which was no very arduous task for two stout healthy lads, used from
childhood to handling the axe. Trapping, and hunting, and snaring hares,
were occupations which they pursued more for the excitement and exercise
than from hunger, as they had laid by abundance of dried, venison, fish,
and birds, besides a plentiful store of rice. They now visited those trees
that they had marked in the summer, where they had noticed the bees hiving,
and cut them down; in one they got more than a pailful of rich honey-comb,
and others yielded some more, some less; this afforded them a delicious
addition to their boiled rice, and dried acid fruits. They might have
melted the wax, and burned candles of it; but this was a refinement of
luxury that never once occurred to our young house-keepers: the dry pine
knots that are found in the woods are the settlers' candles; but Catharine
made some very good vinegar with the refuse of the honey and combs, by
pouring water on it, and leaving it to ferment in a warm nook of the
chimney, in one of the birch-bark vessels, and this was an excellent
substitute for salt as a seasoning to the fresh meat and fish. Like the
Indians, they were now reconciled to the want of this seasonable article.

Indiana seemed to enjoy the cold weather; the lake, though locked up to
every one else, was open to her; with the aid of the tomahawk she patiently
made an opening in the ice, and over this she built a little shelter of
pine boughs stuck into the ice. Armed with a sharp spear carved out of
hardened wood, she would lie upon the ice and patiently await the rising
of some large fish to the air-hole, when dexterously plunging it into the
unwary creature, she dragged it to the surface. Many a noble fish did the
young squaw bring home, and lay at the feet of him whom she had tacitly
elected as her lord and master; to him she offered the voluntary service of
a faithful and devoted servant--I might almost have said, slave.

During the middle of December there were some days of such intense cold,
that even our young Crusoes, hardy as they were, preferred the blazing
log-fire and warm ingle nook, to the frozen lake and cutting north-west
wind which blew the loose snow in blinding drifts over its bleak,
unsheltered surface. Clad in the warm tunic and petticoat of Indian blanket
with fur-lined mocassins, Catharine and her Indian friend felt little cold
excepting to the face when they went abroad, unless the wind was high, and
then experience taught them to keep at home. And these cold gloomy days
they employed in many useful works. Indiana had succeeded in dyeing the
quills of the porcupine that she had captured on Grape Island; with these
she worked a pair of beautiful mocassins and an arrow case for Hector,
besides making a sheath for Louis's _couteau-du-chasse_, of which the young
hunter was very proud, bestowing great praise on the workmanship.

Indiana appeared to be deeply engrossed with some work that she was engaged
in, but preserved a provoking degree of mystery about it, to the no
small annoyance of Louis, who, among his other traits of character, was
remarkably inquisitive, wanting to know the why and wherefore of everything
he saw.

Indiana first prepared a frame of some tough wood, it might be the inner
bark of the oak or elm or hiccory; this was pointed at either end, and wide
in the middle--not very much unlike the form of some broad, flat fish; over
this she wove an open network of narrow thongs of deer-hide, wetted to make
it more pliable, and securely fastened to the frame: when dry, it became
quite tight, and resembled a sort of coarse bamboo-work such as you see on
cane-bottomed chairs and sofas.

"And now, Indiana, tell us what sort of fish you are going to catch in your
ingenious little net," said Louis, who had watched her proceedings with
great interest. The girl shook her head, and laughed till she showed all
her white teeth, but quietly proceeded to commence a second frame like the
first.

Louis put it on his head. No: it could not be meant to be worn there, that
was plain. He turned it round and round. It must be intended for some kind
of bird-trap: yes, that must be it; and he cast an inquiring glance at
Indiana. She blushed, shook her head, and gave another of her silent
laughs.

"Some game like battledore and shuttlecock,"--and snatching up a light
bass-wood chip, he began tossing the chip up and catching it on the netted
frame. The little squaw was highly amused, but rapidly went on with her
work. Louis was now almost angry at the perverse little savage persevering
in keeping him in suspense. She would not tell him till the other was done:
then there were to be a pair of these curious articles: and he was forced
at last to sit quietly down to watch the proceeding of the work. It was
night before the two were completed, and furnished with straps and loops.
When the last stroke was put to them, the Indian girl knelt down at
Hector's feet, and binding them on, pointed to them with a joyous laugh,
and said, "Snow-shoe--for walk on snow--good!"

The boys had heard of snow-shoes, but had never seen them, and now seemed
to understand little of the benefit to be derived from the use of them. The
young Mohawk quickly transferred the snow-shoes to her own feet, and soon
proved to them that the broad surface prevented those who wore them from
sinking into the deep snow. After many trials Hector began to acknowledge
the advantage of walking with the snow-shoes, especially on the frozen snow
on the ice-covered lake. Indiana was well pleased with the approbation that
her manufactures met with, and very soon manufactured for "Nee-chee," as
they all now called Louis, a similar present As to Catharine, she declared
the snow-shoes made her ancles ache, and that she preferred the mocassins
that her cousin Louis made for her. During the long bright days of February
they made several excursions on the lake, and likewise explored some of the
high hills to the eastward. On this ridge there were few large trees; but
it was thickly clothed with scrub oaks, slender poplars, and here and there
fine pines, and picturesque free-growing oaks of considerable size and
great age--patriarchs, they might be termed, among the forest growth.
[Footnote: One of these hoary monarchs of the Oak-lulls still stands at the
head of the lawn at Oaklands, formerly the property of Mr, W. Falkner, now
the residence of the Authoress.] Over this romantic range of hill and
dale, free as the air they breathed, roamed many a gallant herd of deer,
unmolested unless during certain seasons when the Indians came to hunt over
these hills. Surprised at the different growth of the oaks on this side the
plains, Hector could not help expressing his astonishment to Indiana, who
told him that it was caused by the custom that her people had had from time
immemorial of setting fire to the bushes in the early part of spring. This
practice, she said, promoted the growth of the deer-grass, made good cover
for the deer themselves, and effectually prevented the increase of the
large timbers. This circumstance gives a singular aspect to this high ridge
of hills when contrasted with the more wooded portions to the westward.
From the lake these eastern hills look verdant, and as if covered with
tall green fern. In the month of October a rich rosy tint is cast upon the
leaves of the scrub oaks by the autumnal frosts, and they present a glowing
unvaried crimson of the most glorious hue, only variegated in spots by a
dark feathery evergreen, or a patch of light waving poplars turned by the
same wizard's wand to golden yellow.

There were many lovely spots,--lofty rounded hills, and deep shady dells,
with extended tableland, and fine lake views; but on the whole our young
folks preferred the oak openings and the beautiful wooded glens of the
western side, where they had fixed their home.

There was one amusement that they used greatly to enjoy during the cold
bright days and moonlight nights of midwinter. This was gliding down the
frozen snow on the steep side of the dell near the spring, seated on small
hand-sleighs, which carried them down with great velocity. Wrapped in their
warm furs, with caps fastened closely over their ears, what cared they for
the cold? Warm and glowing from head to foot, with cheeks brightened by the
delightful exercise, they would remain for hours enjoying the amusement
of the snow-slide; the bright frost gemming the ground with myriads of
diamonds, sparkling in their hair, or whitening it till it rivalled the
snow beneath their feet. Then, when tired out with the exercise, they
returned to the shanty, stirred up a blazing fire, till the smoked rafters
glowed in the red light; spread their simple fare of stewed rice sweetened
with honey, or maybe a savoury soup of hare or other game; and then, when
warmed and fed, they kneeled together, side by side, and offered up a
prayer of gratitude to their Maker, and besought his care over them during
the dark and silent hours of night.

Had these young people been idle in their habits and desponding in their
tempers, they must have perished with cold and hunger, instead of enjoying
many necessaries and even some little luxuries in their lonely forest home.
Fortunately they had been brought up in the early practice of every sort of
usefulness, to endure every privation with cheerful fortitude; not, indeed,
quietly to sit down and wait for better times, but vigorously to create
those better times by every possible exertion that could be brought into
action to assist and ameliorate their condition.

To be up and doing, is the maxim of a Canadian; and it is this that nerves
his arm to do and bear. The Canadian settler, following in the steps of the
old Americans, learns to supply all his wants by the exercise of his own
energy. He brings up his family to rely upon their own resources, instead
of depending upon his neighbours.

The children of the modern emigrant, though enjoying a higher degree of
civilization and intelligence, arising from a liberal education, might not
have fared so well under similar circumstances as did our Canadian Crusoes,
because, unused to battle with the hardships incidental to a life of
such privation as they had known, they could not have brought so much
experience, or courage, or ingenuity to their aid. It requires courage to
yield to circumstances, as well as to overcome them.

Many little useful additions to the interior of their dwelling were made by
Hector and Louis during the long winter. They made a smoother and better
table than the first rough one that they put together. They also made
a rough partition of split cedars, to form a distinct and separate
sleeping-room for the two girls; but as this division greatly circumscribed
their sitting and cooking apartment, they resolved, as soon as the spring
came, to cut and draw in logs for putting up a better and larger room to be
used as a summer parlour. Indiana and Louis made a complete set of wooden
trenchers out of butter-nut, a fine hard wood of excellent grain, and less
liable to warp or crack than many others.

Louis's skill as a carpenter was much greater than that of his cousin. He
not only possessed more judgment and was more handy, but he had a certain
taste and neatness in finishing his work, however rough his materials and
rude his tools. He inherited some of that skill in mechanism for which the
French have always been remarked. With his knife and a nail he would carve
a plum-stone into a miniature basket, with handle across it, all delicately
wrought with flowers and checker-work. The shell of a butter-nut would be
transformed into a boat, with thwarts, and seats, and rudder; with sails of
bass-wood or birch-bark. Combs he could cut out of wood or bone, so that
Catharine could dress her hair, or confine it in braids or bands at will.
This was a source of great comfort to her; and Louis was always pleased
when he could in any way contribute to his cousin's happiness. These little
arts Louis had been taught by his father. Indeed, the entire distance that
their little, settlement was from any town or village had necessarily
forced their families depend on their own ingenuity and invention to supply
many of their wants. Once or twice a year they saw a trading fur-merchant,
as I before observed; and those were glorious days for Hector and Louis,
who were always on the alert to render the strangers any service in their
power, as by that means they sometimes received little gifts from them, and
gleaned up valuable information as to their craft as hunters and trappers.
And then there were wonderful tales of marvellous feats and hair-breadth
escapes to listen to, as they sat with eager looks and open ears round the
blazing log-fire in the old log-house. Now they would in their turns have
tales to tell of strange adventures, and all that had befallen them since
the first day of their wanderings on the Rice Lake Plains.

The long winter passed away unmarked by any very stirring event. The
Indians had revisited the hunting-grounds; but they confined themselves
chiefly to the eastern side of the plains, the lake, and the islands, and
did not come near their little dwelling to molest them. The latter end of
the month of March presented fine sugar-making weather; and as they had
the use of the big iron pot, they resolved to make maple sugar and some
molasses. Long Island was decided upon as the most eligible place: it
had the advantage over Maple Island of having a shanty ready built for
a shelter during the time they might see fit to remain, and a good
boiling-place, which would be a comfort to the girls, as they need not be
exposed to the weather during the process of sugaring. The two boys soon
cut down some small pines and bass-woods, which they hewed out into
sugar-troughs; Indiana manufactured some rough pails of birch-bark; and the
first favourable day for the work they loaded up a hand-sleigh with their
vessels, and marched forth over the ice to the island, and tapped the trees
they thought could yield sap for their purpose. And many pleasant days they
passed during the sugar-making season. They did not leave the sugar-bush
for good till the commencement of April, when the sun and wind beginning to
unlock the springs that fed the lake, and to act upon its surface, taught
them that it would not long be prudent to remain on the island. The loud
booming sounds that were now frequently heard of the pent-up air beneath
striving to break forth from its icy prison, were warnings not to be
neglected. Openings began to appear, especially at the entrance of the
river, and between the islands, and opposite to some of the larger creeks;
blue streams that attracted the water-fowl, ducks, and wild geese, that
came, guided by that instinct that never errs, from their abiding-places
in far-off lands; and Indiana knew the signs of the wild birds coming and
going with a certainty that seemed almost marvellous to her simple-minded
companions.

How delightful were the first indications of the coming spring! How
joyously our young Crusoes heard the first tapping of the redheaded
woodpecker, the low, sweet, warbling note of the early song-sparrow, and
twittering chirp of the snow-bird, or that neat quakerly-looking bird, that
comes to cheer us with the news of sunny days and green buds, the low,
tender, whispering note of the chiccadee, flitting among the pines or in
the thick branches of the shore-side trees! The chattering note of the
little striped chitmunk, as it pursued its fellows over the fallen trees,
and the hollow sound of the male partridge heavily striking his wings
against his sides to attract the notice of the female birds--were among the
early spring melodies, for such they seemed to our forest dwellers, and for
such they listened with eager ears, for they told them--

  "That winter, cold winter, was past,
  And that spring, lovely spring, was approaching at last."

They watched for the first song of the robin, [Footnote: _Turdus
miyratorius_, or American robin.] and the full melody of the red thrush
[Footnote: _Turdus melodus,_ or wood-thrush.]; the rushing sound of the
passenger-pigeon, as flocks of these birds darted above their heads,
sometimes pausing to rest on the dry limb of some withered oak, or darting
down to feed upon the scarlet berries of the spicy winter-green, the acorns
that still lay upon the now uncovered ground, or the berries of hawthorn
and dogwood that still hung on the bare bushes. The pines were now putting
on their rich, mossy, green spring dresses; the skies were deep blue;
nature, weary of her long state of inaction, seemed waking into life and
light.

On the Plains the snow soon disappears, for the sun and air has access to
the earth much easier than in the close, dense forest; and Hector and Louis
were soon able to move about with axe in hand, to cut the logs for the
addition to the house which they proposed making. They also set to work as
soon as the frost was out of the ground, to prepare their little field
for the Indian corn. This kept them quite busy. Catharine attended to the
house, and Indiana went out fishing and hunting, bringing in plenty of
small game and fish every day. After they had piled and burned up the loose
boughs and trunks that encumbered the space which they had marked out, they
proceeded to enclose it with a "brush fence", which was done by felling the
trees that stood in the line of the field, and letting them fall so as to
form the bottom log of the fence, which they then made of sufficient height
by piling up arms of trees and brush-wood. Perhaps in this matter they were
too particular, as there was no fear of "breachy cattle," or any cattle,
intruding on the crop; but Hector maintained that deer and bears were as
much to be guarded against as oxen and cows.

The little enclosure was made secure from any such depredators, and was as
clean as hands could make it, and the two cousins were sitting on a log,
contentedly surveying their work, and talking of the time when the grain
was to be put in. It was about the beginning of the second week in May,
as near as they could guess from the bursting of the forest buds and the
blooming of such of the flowers as they were acquainted with. Hector's eyes
had followed the flight of a large eagle that now, turning from the lake,
soared away majestically towards the east or Oak-hills. But soon his
eye was attracted to another object. The loftiest part of the ridge was
enveloped in smoke. At first he thought it must be some mist-wreath
hovering over its brow; but soon the dense rolling clouds rapidly spread
on each side, and he felt certain that it was from fire, and nothing but
fire,[Footnote: Appendix I.] that those dark volumes arose.

"Louis, look yonder! the hills to the east are on fire."

"On fire, Hector? you are dreaming!"

"Nay, but look there!"

The hills were now shrouded in one dense, rolling, cloud; it moved on with
fearful rapidity down the shrubby side of the hill, supplied by the dry,
withered foliage and deer-grass, which was like stubble to the flames.

"It is two miles off, or more," said Louis; "and the creek will stop its
progress long before it comes near us--and the swamp there, beyond Bare
Hill."

"The cedars are as dry as tinder; and as to the creek, it is so narrow, a
burning tree falling across would convey the fire to this side; besides,
when the wind rises, as it always does when the bush is on fire, you know
how far the burning leaves will fly. Do you remember when the forest was on
fire last spring, how long it continued to burn, and how fiercely it raged!
It was lighted by the ashes of your father's pipe, when he was out in the
new fallow; the leaves were dry, and kindled; and before night the woods
were burning for miles." "It was a grand spectacle, those pine-hills, when
the fire got in among them," said Louis.. "See, see how fast the fires
kindle; that must be some fallen pine that they have got hold of; now, look
at the lighting up of that hill--is it not grand?"

"If the wind would but change, and blow in the opposite direction!" said
Hector, anxiously.

"The wind, mon ami, seems to have little influence; for as long as the fire
finds fuel from the dry bushes and grass, it drives on, even against the
wind."

As they spoke the wind freshened, and they could plainly see a long line of
wicked, bright flames, in advance of the dense mass of vapour which hung
in its rear. On it came, that rolling sea of flame, with inconceivable
rapidity, gathering strength as it advanced. The demon of destruction
spread its red wings to the blast, rushing on with fiery speed; and soon
hill and valley were wrapped in one sheet of flame.

"It must have been the work of the Indians," said Louis. "We had better
make a retreat to the island, in case of the fire crossing the valley. We
must not neglect the canoe; if the fire sweeps round by the swamp, it may
come upon us unawares, and then the loss of the canoe would prevent escape
by the lake. But here are the girls; let us consult them.

"It is the Indian burning," said Indiana; "that is the reason there are so
few big trees on that hill; they burn it to make the grass better for the
deer."

Hector had often pointed out to Louis the appearance of fire having
scorched the bark of the trees, where they were at work, but it seemed to
have been many years back; and when they were digging for the site of the
root-house [Footnote: Root-houses are built over deep excavations below the
reach of the frost, or the roots stored would be spoiled.] below the bank,
which they had just finished, they had met with charred wood, at the depth
of six feet below the soil, which must have lain there till the earth had
accumulated over it; a period of many years must necessarily have passed
since the wood had been burned, as it was so much decomposed as to crumble
beneath the wooden shovel which they were digging with.

All day they watched the progress of that, fiery sea whose waves were
flame--red, rolling flame. Onward it came, with resistless speed,
overpowering every obstacle, widening its sphere of action, till it formed
a perfect semicircle about them. As the night drew on, the splendour of the
scene became more apparent, and the path of the fire better defined; but
there was no fear of the conflagration spreading as it had done in the
daytime. The wind had sunk, and the copious dews of evening effectually put
a stop to the progress of the fire. The children could now gaze in security
upon the magnificent spectacle before them, without the excitement produced
by its rapid spread during the daytime. They lay down to sleep in perfect
security that night, but with the consciousness that, as the breeze sprung
up in the morning, they must be on the alert to secure their little
dwelling and its contents from the devastation that threatened it. They
knew that they had no power to stop its onward course, as they possessed
no implement better than a rough wood shovel, which would be found very
ineffectual in opening a trench or turning the ground up, so as to cut off
the communication with the dry grass, leaves, and branches, which are the
fuel for supplying the fires on the Plains. The little clearing on one side
the house they thought would be its safeguard, but the fire was advancing
on three sides of them.

"Let us hold a council, as the Indians do, to consider what is to be done."

"I propose," said Louis, "retreating, bag and baggage, to the nearest point
of Long Island." "My French cousin has well spoken," said Hector, mimicking
the Indian mode of speaking; "but listen to the words of the wise. I
propose to take all our household stores that are of the most value, to the
island, and lodge the rest safely in our new root-house, first removing
from its neighbourhood all such light, loose matter as is likely to take
fire; the earthen roof will save it from destruction; as to the shanty, it
must take its chance to stand or fall."

"The fence of the little clearing will be burned, no doubt. Well, never
mind, better that than our precious selves; and the corn, fortunately, is
not yet sown," said Louis.

Hector's advice met with general applause, and the girls soon set to work
to secure the property they meant to leave.

It was a fortunate thing that the root-house had been finished, as it
formed a secure storehouse for their goods, and would also be made
available as a hiding-place from the Indians, in time of need. The boys
carefully scraped away all the combustible matter from its vicinity, and
also from the house; but the rapid increase of the fire now warned them to
hurry down to join Catharine and the young Mohawk, who had gone off to the
lake shore, with such things as they required to take with them.




CHAPTER XI.

  "I know a lake where the cool waves break,
  And softly fall on the silver sand,
  And no stranger intrudes on that solitude,
  And no voices but ours disturb the strand."
  IRISH SONG

The breeze had sprung up, and had already brought the fire down as far as
the creek. The swamp had long been on fire, and now the flames were leaping
among the decayed timbers, roaring and crackling among the pines, and
rushing to the tops of the cedars, springing from heap to heap of the
fallen branches, and filling the air with dense volumes of black and
suffocating smoke. So quickly did the flames advance that Hector and Louis
had only time to push off the canoe before the heights along the shore were
wrapped in smoke and fire. Many a giant oak and noble pine fell crashing to
the earth, sending up showers of red sparks, as its burning trunk shivered
in its fall. Glad to escape from the suffocating vapour, the boys quickly
paddled out to the island, enjoying the cool, fresh air of the lake.
Reposing on the grass beneath the trees, they passed the day, sheltered
from the noonday sun, and watched the progress of the fires upon the shore.
At night the girls slept securely under the canoe, which they raised on one
side by means of forked sticks stuck in the ground.

It was a grand sight to see the burning plains at night, reflected on the
water. A thousand naming torches flickered upon its still surface, to which
the glare of a gas-lighted city would have been dim and dull by contrast.

Louis and Hector would speculate on the probable chances of the shanty
escaping from the fire, and of the fence remaining untouched. Of the safety
of the root-house they entertained no fear, as the grass was already
springing green on the earthen roof; and below they had taken every
precaution to secure its safely, by scraping up the earth near it.
[Footnote: Many a crop of grain and comfortable homestead has been saved
by turning a furrow round the field; and great conflagrations have been
effectually stopped by men beating the fire out with spades, and hoeing
up the fresh earth so as to cut off all communication with the dry roots,
grass, and leaves that feed its onward progress. Water, even could it be
got, which is often impossible, is not near so effectual in stopping
the progress of fire; even women and little children can assist in such
emergencies.]

Catharine lamented for the lovely spring-flowers that would be destroyed
by the fire. "We shall have neither huckleberries nor strawberries this
summer," she said, mournfully; "and the pretty roses and bushes will be
scorched, and the ground black and dreary."

"The fire passes so rapidly over that it does not destroy many of the
forest trees, only the dead ones are destroyed; and that, you know, leaves
more space for the living ones to grow and thrive in," said Hector. "I have
seen, the year after a fire has run in the bush, a new and fresh set of
plants spring up, and even some that looked withered recover; the earth is
renewed and manured by the ashes; and it is not so great a misfortune as it
at first appears."

"But how black and dismal the burnt pine-woods look for years!" said Louis;
"I do not think there is a more melancholy sight in life than one of those
burnt pine-woods. There it stands, year after year, the black, branchless
trees pointing up to the blue sky, as if crying for vengeance against those
that kindled the fires."

"They do, indeed, look ugly," said Catharine; "yet the girdled ones look
very nearly as ill." [Footnote: The girdled pines are killed by barking
them round, to facilitate the clearing.]

At the end of two days the fires had ceased to rage, though the dim
smoke-wreaths to the westward showed where the work of destruction was
still going on.

As there was no appearance of any Indians on the lake, nor yet at the point
(Andersen's Point, as it is now called), on the other side, they concluded
the fires had possibly originated by accident,--some casual hunter or
trapper having left his camp-fire unextinguished; but as they were not
very likely to come across the scene of the conflagration, they decided
on returning back to their old home without delay; and it was with some
feeling of anxiety that they hastened to see what evil had befallen their
shanty.

"The shanty is burned!" was the simultaneous exclamation of both Louis and
Hector, as they reached the rising ground that should have commanded a
view of its roof. "It is well for us that we secured our things in the
root-house," said Hector.

"Well, if that is safe, who cares? we can soon build up a new house, larger
and better than the old one," said Louis. "The chief of our fence is gone,
too, I see; but that we can renew at our leisure; no hurry, if we get it
done a month hence, say I. Come, _ma belle_, do not look so sorrowful.
There is our little squaw will help us to set up a capital wigwam, while
the new house is building." "But the nice table that you made, Louis, and
the benches and shelves!"

"Never mind, Cathy, we will have better tables, and benches, and shelves
too. Never fear, _ma chere_, the same industrious Louis will make things
comfortable. I am not sorry the old shanty is down; we shall have a famous
one put up, twice as large, for the winter. After the corn is planted we
shall have nothing else to do but to think about it."

The next two or three days was spent in erecting a wigwam, with poles and
birch bark; and as the weather was warm and pleasant, they did not feel the
inconvenience so much as they would have done had it been earlier in the
season. The root-house formed an excellent store-house and pantry; and
Indiana contrived, in putting up the wigwam, to leave certain loose folds
between the birch-bark lining and outer covering, which formed a series of
pouches or bags, in which many articles could be stowed away out of sight.
[Footnote: In this way the winter wigwams of the Indians are constructed so
as to give plenty of stowing room for all their little household matters,
materials for work, &c.]

While the girls were busy contriving the arrangements of the wigwam,
the two boys were not idle. The time was come for planting the corn; a
succession of heavy thunder-showers had soaked and softened the scorched
earth, and rendered the labour of moving it much easier than they had
anticipated. They had cut for themselves wooden trowels, with which they
raised the hills for the seed. The corn planted, they next turned their
attention to cutting house-logs; those which they had prepared had been
burned up; so they had their labour to begin again.

The two girls proved good helps at the raising; and in the course of a few
weeks they had the comfort of seeing a more commodious dwelling than the
former one put up. The finishing of this, with weeding the Indian corn,
renewing the fence, and fishing, and trapping, and shooting partridges and
ducks and pigeons, fully occupied their time this summer. The fruit season
was less abundant this year than the previous one. The fire had done this
mischief, and they had to go far a-field to collect fruits during the
summer months.

It so happened that Indiana had gone out early one morning with the boys,
and Catharine was alone. She had gone down to the spring for water, and on
her return was surprised at the sight of a squaw and her family of three
half-grown lads, and an innocent little brown papoose. [Footnote: An Indian
baby; but "papoose" is not an Indian word. It is probably derived from the
Indian imitation of the word "baines."] In their turn the strangers seemed
equally astonished at Catharine's appearance.

The smiling aspect and good-natured laugh of the female, however, soon
reassured the frightened girl, and she gladly gave her the water which she
had in her birch dish, on her signifying her desire for drink. To this
Catharine added some berries, and dried venison, and a bit of maple sugar,
which was received with grateful looks by the boys; she patted the brown
baby, and was glad when the mother released it from its wooden cradle, and
fed and nursed it. The squaw seemed to notice the difference between the
colour of her young hostess's fair skin and her own swarthy hue; for she
often took her hand, stripped up the sleeve of her dress, and compared her
arm with her own, uttering exclamations of astonishment and curiosity;
possibly Catharine was the first of a fair-skinned race this poor savage
had ever seen. After her meal was finished, she set the birchen dish on the
floor, and restrapping the papoose in its cradle prison, she slipped the
basswood-bark rope over her forehead, and silently signing to her sons to
follow her, she departed. That evening a pair of ducks were found fastened
to the wooden latch of the door, a silent offering of gratitude for the
refreshment that had been afforded to this Indian woman and her children.

Indiana thought, from Catharine's description, that these were Indians with
whom she was acquainted she spent some days in watching the lake and the
ravine, lest a larger and more formidable party should be near. The squaw,
she said, was a widow, and went by the name of Mother Snow-storm, from
having been lost in the woods, when a little child, during a heavy storm of
snow, and nearly starved to death. She was a gentle, kind woman, and, she
believed, would not do any of them hurt. Her sons were good hunters; and
though so young, helped to support their mother, and were very good to her
and the little one.

I must now pass over a considerable interval of time, with merely a brief
notice that the crop of corn was carefully harvested, and proved abundant,
and a source of great comfort. The rice was gathered and stored, and plenty
of game and fish laid by, with an additional store of honey.

The Indians, for some reason, did not pay their accustomed visit to the
lake this season. Indiana said they might be engaged with war among some
hostile tribes, or had gone to other hunting grounds. The winter was
unusually mild, and it was long before it set in. Yet the spring following
was tardy, and later than usual. It was the latter end of May before
vegetation had made any very decided progress.

The little loghouse presented a neat and comfortable appearance, both
within and without. Indiana had woven a handsome mat of bass bark for the
floor; Louis and Hector had furnished it with very decent seats and a
table, rough, but still very respectably constructed, considering their
only tools were a tomahawk, a knife, and wooden wedges for splitting the
wood into slabs. These Louis afterwards smoothed with great care and
patience. Their bedsteads were furnished with thick, soft mate, woven by
Indiana and Catharine, from rushes which they cut and dried; but the little
squaw herself preferred lying on a mat or deer-skin on the floor before the
fire, as she had been accustomed.

A new field had been enclosed, and a fresh crop of corn planted, and
was now green and flourishing. Peace and happiness dwelt within the
loghouse;--but for the regrets that ever attended the remembrance of all
they had left and lost, no cloud would have dimmed the serenity of those
who dwelt beneath its humble roof.

The season of flowers had again arrived,--the earth, renovated by the fire
of the former year, bloomed with fresh beauty,--June, with its fragrant
store of roses and lilies, was now far advanced,--the anniversary of that
time when they had left their beloved parents' roofs, to become sojourners
in the lonely wilderness, had returned. Much they felt they had to be
grateful for. Many privations, it is true, and much anxiety they had felt;
but they had enjoyed blessings above all that they could have expected, and
they might, like the Psalmist when recounting the escapes of the people
of God, have said,--"Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his
goodness, and the wonders that he doeth for the children of men." And now
they declared no greater evil could befal them than to lose one of their
little party, for even Indiana had become as a dear and beloved sister; her
gentleness, her gratitude and faithful trusting love, seemed each day to
increase. Now, indeed, she was bound to them by a yet more sacred tie, for
she knelt to the same God, and acknowledged, with fervent love, the mercies
of her Redeemer. She had made great progress in learning their language,
and had also taught her friends to speak and understand much of her own
tongue; so that they were now no longer at a loss to converse with her on
any subject. Thus was this Indian girl united to them in bonds of social
and Christian love.

Hector, Louis, and Indiana had gone over the hills to follow the track of
a deer which had paid a visit to the young corn, now sprouting and showing
symptoms of shooting up to blossom. Catharine usually preferred staying at
home, and preparing the meals against their return. She had gathered some
fine ripe strawberries, which, with plenty of stewed rice, Indian meal
cake, and maple sugar, was to make their dinner. She was weary and warm,
for the day had been hot and sultry. Seating herself on the threshold of
the door, she leaned her tack against the doorpost, and closed her eyes.
Perhaps the poor child's thoughts were wandering back to her far-off,
never-to-be-forgotten home, or she might be thinking of the hunters and
their game. Suddenly a vague, undefinable feeling of dread stole over her
mind: she heard no steps, she felt no breath, she saw no form; but there
was a strange consciousness that she was not alone--that some unseen being
was near, some eye was upon her. I have heard of sleepers starting from
sleep the most profound when the noiseless hand of the assassin has been
raised to destroy them, as if the power of the human eye could be felt
through the closed lid.

Thus fared it with Catharine: she felt as if some unseen enemy was near
her; and, springing to her feet, she cast a wild, troubled glance around.
No living being met her eye; and, ashamed of her cowardice, she resumed her
seat. The tremulous cry of her little grey squirrel, a pet which she had
tamed and taught to run to her and nestle in her bosom, attracted her
attention.

"What aileth thee, wee dearie?" she said, tenderly, as the timid little
creature crept, trembling, to her breast. "Thy mistress has scared thee by
her own foolish fears. See now, there is neither cat-a-mount nor weasel
here to seize thee, silly one;" and as she spoke she raised her head, and
flung back the thick clusters of soft fair hair that shaded her eyes. The
deadly glare of a pair of dark eyes fixed upon her met her terrified gaze,
gleaming with sullen ferocity from the angle of the door-post, whence the
upper part of the face alone was visible, partly concealed by a mat of
tangled, shaggy, black hair. Paralysed with fear, the poor girl neither
spoke nor moved; she uttered no cry; but pressing her hands tightly across
her breast, as if to still the loud beating of her heart, she sat gazing
upon that fearful appearance, while, with stealthy step, the savage
advanced from his lurking-place, keeping, as he did so, his eyes riveted
upon hers, with such a gaze as the wily serpent is said to fascinate his
prey. His hapless victim moved not; whither could she flee to escape one
whose fleet foot could so easily have overtaken her in the race? where
conceal herself from him whose wary eye fixed upon her seemed to deprive
her of all vital energy?

Uttering that singular, expressive guttural which seems with the Indian to
answer the purpose of every other exclamation, he advanced, and taking the
girl's ice-cold hands in his, tightly bound them with a thong of deer's
hide, and led her unresistingly away. By a circuitous path through the
ravine they reached the foot of the mount, where lay a birch canoe, rocking
gently on the waters, in which a middle-aged female and a young girl were
seated. The females asked no questions, and expressed no word indicative of
curiosity or surprise, as the strong arm of the Indian lifted his captive
into the canoe, and made signs to the elder squaw to push from the shore.
When all had taken their places, the woman, catching up a paddle from the
bottom of the little vessel, stood up, and with a few rapid strokes sent it
skimming over the lake.

The miserable captive, overpowered with the sense of her calamitous
situation, bowed down her head upon her knees, and concealing her agitated
face in her garments, wept in silent agony. Visions of horror presented
themselves to her bewildered brain--all that Indiana had described of the
cruelty of this vindictive race, came vividly before her mind. Poor child,
what miserable thoughts were thine during that brief voyage!

Had the Indians also captured her friends? or was she alone to be the
victim of their vengeance? What would be the feelings of those I beloved
ones on returning to their home and finding it desolate! Was there no hope
of release? As these ideas chased each other through her agitated mind, she
raised her eyes all streaming with tears to the faces of the Indian and his
companions with so piteous a look, that any heart but the stoical one of an
Indian would have softened at its sad appeal; but no answering glance of
sympathy met hers, no eye gave back its silent look of pity--not a nerve
or a muscle moved the cold apathetic features of the Indians, and the
woe-stricken girl again resumed her melancholy attitude, burying her
face in her heaving bosom to hide its bitter emotions from the heartless
strangers.

She was not folly aware that it is part of the Indian's education to hide
the inward feelings of the heart, to check all those soft and tender
emotions which distinguish the civilized man from the savage.

It does indeed need the softening influence of that powerful Spirit, which
was shed abroad into the world to turn the hearts of the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just, to break down the strongholds of unrighteousness, and
to teach man that he is by nature the child of wrath and victim of sin, and
that in his unregenerated nature his whole mind is at enmity with God and
his fellow-men, and that in his flesh dwelleth no good thing. And the
Indian has acknowledged that power,--he has cast his idols of cruelty and
revenge, those virtues on which he prided himself in the blindness of his
heart, to the moles and the bats; he has bowed and adored at the foot of
the Cross;--but it was not so in the days whereof I have spoken. [Footnote:
Appendix K.]




CHAPTER XII.

  "Must this sweet new-blown rose find such, a winter
  Before her spring be past?"
  BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER

The little bark touched the stony point of Long Island. The Indian lifted
his weeping prisoner from the canoe, and motioned to her to move forward
along the narrow path that led to the camp, about twenty yards higher up
the bank, where there was a little grassy spot enclosed, with shrubby
trees--the squaws tarried at the lake-shore to bring up the paddles and
secure the canoe.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of an enemy, but doubly so,
when that enemy is a stranger to the language in which we would plead for
mercy--whose God is not our God, nor his laws those by which we ourselves
are governed. Thus felt the poor captive as she stood alone, mute with
terror among the half-naked dusky forms with which she now found herself
surrounded. She cast a hurried glance round that strange assembly, if by
chance her eye might rest upon some dear familiar face, but she saw not
the kind but grave face of Hector, nor met the bright sparkling eye of her
cousin Louis, nor the soft, subdued, pensive features of the Indian girl,
her adopted sister--she stood alone among those wild gloomy-looking men;
some turned away their eyes as if they would not meet her woe-stricken
countenance, lest they should be moved to pity her sad condition; no wonder
that, overcome by the sense of her utter friendliness, she hid her face
with her fettered hands and wept in despair. But the Indian's sympathy is
not moved by tears and sighs; calmness, courage, defiance of danger and
contempt of death, are what he venerates and admires even in an enemy.

The Indians beheld her grief unmoved. At length the old man, who seemed to
be a chief among the rest, motioned to one of the women who leant against
the side of the wigwam, to come forward and lead away the stranger;
Catharine, whose senses were beginning to be more collected, heard the old
man give orders that she was to be fed and cared for. Gladly did she escape
from the presence of those pitiless men, from whose gaze she shrunk with
maidenly modesty. And now when alone with the women she hesitated not to
make use of that natural language which requires not the aid of speech to
make itself understood; clasping her hands imploringly, she knelt at the
feet of the Indian woman, her conductress--kissed her dark hands and bathed
them with her fast flowing tears, while she pointed passionately to the
shore where lay the happy home from which she had been so suddenly torn.

The squaw, though she evidently comprehended the meaning of her imploring
gestures, shook her head, and in plaintive earnest tone replied in her own
language, that she must go with the canoes to the other shore,--and she
pointed to the north as she spoke. She then motioned to the young girl--the
same that had been Catharine's companion in the canoe--to bring a hunting
knife, which was thrust into one of the folds of the birch-bark of the
wigwam. Catharine beheld the deadly weapon in the hands of the Indian woman
with a pang of agony as great as if its sharp edge was already at her
throat. So young--so young, to die by a cruel bloody death! what had been
her crime?--how should she find words to soften the heart of her murderess?
The power of utterance seemed denied--she cast herself on her knees and
held up her hands in silent prayer; not to the dreaded Indian woman, but to
Him who heareth the prayer of the poor destitute--who alone can order the
unruly wills and affections of men.

The squaw stretched forth one dark hand and grasped the arm of the
terror-struck girl, while the other held the weapon of destruction; with a
quick movement she severed the thongs that bound the fettered wrists of the
pleading captive, and with a smile that seemed to light up her whole face
she raised her from her prostrate position, laid her hand upon her young
head, and with an expression of good-humoured surprise lifted the flowing
tresses of her sunny hair and spread them over the back of her own swarthy
hand; then, as if amused by the striking contrast, she shook down her own
jetty-black hair and twined a tress of it with one of the fair haired
girl's--then laughed till her teeth shone like pearls within her red lips.
Many were the exclamations of childish wonder that broke from the other
females, as they compared the snowy arm of the stranger with their own
dusky skins; it was plain that they had no intention of harming her, and by
degrees distrust and dread of her singular companions began in some measure
to subside.

The squaw motioned her to take a seat on a mat beside her, and gave her a
handful of parched rice and some deer's flesh to eat; but Catharine's heart
was too heavy; she was suffering from thirst, and on pronouncing the Indian
word for water, the young girl snatched up a piece of birch-bark from the
floor of the tent, and gathering the corners together, ran to the lake, and
soon returned with water in this most primitive drinking vessel, which
she held to the lips of her guest, and she seemed amused by the long deep
draught with which Catharine slaked her thirst; and something like a gleam
of hope came over her mind as she marked the look of kindly feeling with
which she caught the young Indian girl regarding her, and she strove to
overcome the choking sensation that would from time to time rise to her
throat, as she fluctuated between hope and fear. The position of the Indian
camp was so placed that it was quite hidden from the shore, and neither
could Catharine see the mouth of the ravine, nor the steep side of the
mount that her brothers were accustomed to ascend and descend in their
visits to the lake shore, nor had she any means of making a signal to them
even if she had seen them on the beach.

The long, anxious, watchful night passed, and soon after sunrise, while
the morning mists still hung over the lake, the canoes of the Indians
were launched, and long before noon they were in the mouth of the river.
Catharine's heart sunk within her as the fast receding shores of the lake
showed each minute fainter in the distance. At midday they halted at a
fine bend in the river, where a small open place and a creek flowing down
through the woods afforded them cool water; and here they found several
tents put up and a larger party awaiting their return. The river was here
a fine, broad, deep and tranquil stream; trees of many kinds fringed the
edge; beyond was the unbroken forest, whose depths had never been pierced
by the step of man--so thick and luxuriant was the vegetation that even the
Indian could hardly have penetrated through its dark swampy glades: far
as the eye could reach, that impenetrable interminable wall of verdure
stretched away into the far off distance.

On that spot where our Indian camp then stood, are now pleasant open
meadows, with an avenue of fine pines and balsams; showing on the eminence
above, a large substantial dwelling-house surrounded by a luxuriant orchard
and garden, the property of a naval officer, [Footnote: Lt. Rubidge,
whose interesting account of his early settlement may be read in a letter
inserted in Captain Basil Hall's Letters from Canada.] who with the
courage and perseverance that mark brave men of his class, first ventured
to break the bush and locate himself and his infant family in the lonely
wilderness, then far from any beaten road or the haunts of his fellow-men.

But at the period of which I write, the axe of the adventurous settler had
not levelled one trunk of that vast forest, neither had the fire scathed
it; no voices of happy joyous children had rung through those shades, nor
sound of rural labour nor bleating flock awakened its echoes.

All the remainder of that sad day, Catharine sat on the grass under a shady
tree, her eyes mournfully fixed on the slow flowing waters, and wondering
at her own hard fate in being thus torn from her home and its dear inmates.
Bad as she had thought her separation from her father and mother and her
brothers, when she first left her home to become a wanderer on the Rice
Lake Plains, how much more dismal now was her situation, snatched from the
dear companions who had upheld and cheered her on in all her sorrows! But
now she was alone with none to love or cherish or console her, she felt a
desolation of spirit that almost made her forgetful of that trust that had
hitherto always sustained her in time of trouble or sickness. She looked
round, and her eye fell on the strange unseemly forms of men and women,
who cared not for her, and to whom she was an object of indifference or
aversion: she wept when she thought of the grief that her absence would
occasion to Hector and Louis; the thought of their distress increased her
own.

The soothing quiet of the scene, with the low lulling sound of the little
brook as its tiny wavelets fell tinkling over the massy roots and stones
that impeded its course to the river, joined with fatigue and long exposure
to the sun and air, caused her at length to fall asleep. The last rosy
light of the setting sun was dyeing the waters with a glowing tint when she
awoke; a soft blue haze hung upon the trees; the kingfisher and dragon-fly,
and a solitary loon, were the only busy things abroad on the river; the
first darting up and down from an upturned root near the water's edge,
feeding its youngings; the dragon-fly hawking with rapid whirring sound for
insects, and the loon, just visible from above the surface of the still
stream, sailed quietly on companionless, like her who watched its
movements.

The bustle of the hunters returning with game and fish to the encampment
roused many a sleepy brown papoose, the fires were renewed, and the evening
meal was now preparing,--and Catharine, chilled by the falling dew, crept
to the enlivening warmth. And here she was pleased at being recognised by
one friendly face--it was the mild and benevolent countenance of the widow
Snowstorm, who, with her three sons, came to bid her to share their camp
fire and food. The kindly grasp of the hand, the beaming smile that was
given by this good creature, albeit she was ugly and ill-featured, cheered
the sad captive's heart. She had given her a cup of cold water and what
food her log-cabin afforded, and in return the good Indian took her to her
wigwam and fed, and warmed, and cherished her with the loving-kindness of
a Christian; and during all her sojourn in the Indian camp she was as a
tender mother over her, drying her tears and showing her those little
acts of attention that even the untaught Indians know are grateful to the
sorrowful and destitute. Catharine often forgot her own griefs to repay
this worthy creature's kindness, by attending to her little babe and
assisting her in some of her homely preparations of cookery or household
work. She knew that a selfish indulgence in sorrow would do her no good,
and after the lapse of some days she so well disciplined her own heart as
to check her tears at least in the presence of the Indian women, and to
assume an air of comparative cheerfulness. Once she found Indian words
enough to ask the Indian widow to convey her back to the lake, but she
shook her head and bade her not think anything about it; and added, that in
the fall, when the ducks came to the rice-beds, they should all return, and
then if she could obtain leave from the chief, she would restore her to
her lodge on the plains; but signified to her that patience was her only
present remedy, and that submission to the will of the chief was her wisest
plan. Comforted by this vague promise, Catharine strove to be reconciled to
her strange lot, and still stranger companions. She could not help being
surprised at the want of curiosity respecting her that was shown by the
Indians in the wigwam, when she was brought thither; they appeared to take
little notice that a stranger and one so dissimilar to themselves had been
introduced into the camp, for before her they asked no questions about her,
whatever they might do when she was absent, though they surveyed her with
silent attention. Catharine learned, by long acquaintance with this people,
that an outward manifestation of surprise [Footnote: See Appendix L.] is
considered a want of etiquette and good breeding, or rather a proof of
weakness and childishness. The women, like other females, are certainly
less disposed to repress this feeling of inquisitiveness than the men, and
one of their great sources of amusement, when Catharine was among them, was
examining the difference of texture and colour of her skin and hair, and
holding long consultations over them. The young girl and her mother, those
who had paddled the canoe the day she was carried away to the island,
showed her much kindness in a quiet way. The young squaw was granddaughter
to the old chief, and seemed to be regarded with considerable respect by
the rest of the women; she was a gay lively creature, often laughing, and
seemed to enjoy an inexhaustible fund of good humour. She was inclined to
extend her patronage to the young stranger, making her eat out of her own
bark dish, and sit beside her on her own mat. She wove a chain of the
sweet-scented grass with which the Indians delight in adorning themselves,
likewise in perfuming their lodges with bunches or strewings upon the
floor. She took great pains in teaching her how to acquire the proper
attitude of sitting, after the fashion of the Eastern nations, which
position the Indian women assume when at rest in their wigwams. The Indian
name of this little damsel signified the Snow-bird. She was, like that
lively restless bird, always flitting to and fro from tent to tent, as
garrulous and as cheerful too as that merry little herald of the spring.

Once she seemed particularly attracted by Catharine's dress, which she
examined with critical minuteness, evincing great surprise at the cut
fringes of dressed doeskin with which Indiana had ornamented the border of
the short jacket which she had manufactured for Catharine. These fringes
she pointed out to the notice of the women, and even the old chief was
called in to examine the dress; nor did the leggings and mocassins escape
their observation. There was something mysterious about her garments.
Catharine was at a loss to imagine what caused those deep guttural
exclamations, somewhat between a grunt and a groan, that burst from the
lips of the Indians, as they one by one examined them with deep attention.
These people had recognised in these things the peculiar fashion and
handiwork of the young Mohawk girl whom they had exposed to perish by
hunger and thirst on Bare Hill, and much their interest was excited to know
by what means Catharine had become possessed of a dress wrought by the hand
of one whom they had numbered with the dead. Strange and mysterious did it
seem to them, and warily did they watch the unconscious object of their
wonder.

The knowledge that she possessed of the language of her friend Indiana,
enabled Catharine to comprehend a great deal of what was said; yet she
prudently refrained from speaking in the tongue of one, to whose whole
nation she knew these people to be hostile, but she sedulously endeavoured
to learn their own peculiar dialect, and in this she succeeded in an
incredibly short time, so that she was soon able to express her own wants,
and converse a little with the females who were about her.

She had noticed that among the tents there was one which stood apart from
the rest, and was only visited by the old chief and his granddaughter, or
by the elder women. At first she imagined it was some sick person, or a
secret tent set apart for the worship of the Great Spirit; but one day when
the chief of the people had gone up the river hunting, and the children
were asleep, she perceived the curtain of skins drawn back, and a female of
singular and striking beauty appeared standing in the open space in front.
She was habited in a fine tunic of white dressed doeskin richly embroidered
with coloured beads and stained quills, a full petticoat of dark cloth
bound with scarlet descended to her ancles, leggings fringed with deer-skin
knotted with bands of coloured quills, with richly wrought mocassins on her
feet. On her head she wore a coronet of scarlet and black feathers; her
long shining tresses of raven hair descended to her waist, each thick tress
confined with a braided band of quills dyed scarlet and blue; her stature
was tall and well-formed; her large, liquid, dark eye wore an expression
so proud and mournful that Catharine felt her own involuntarily fill with
tears as she gazed upon this singular being. She would have approached
nearer to her, but a spell seemed on her; she shrunk back timid and abashed
beneath that wild melancholy glance. It was she, the Beam of the Morning,
the self-made widow of the young Mohawk, whose hand had wrought so fearful
a vengeance on the treacherous destroyer of her brother. She stood there,
at the tent door, arrayed in her bridal robes, as on the day when she
received her death-doomed victim. And when she recalled her fearful deed,
shuddering with horror, Catharine drew back and shrouded herself within
the tent, fearing again to fall under the eye of that terrible woman. She
remembered how Indiana had told her that since that fatal marriage-feast
she had been kept apart from the rest of the tribe,--she was regarded by
her people as a sacred character, a great _Medicine_, a female _brave_, a
being whom they regarded with mysterious reverence. She had made this great
sacrifice for the good of her nation. Indiana said it was believed among
her own folks that she had loved the young Mohawk passionately, as a
tender woman loves the husband of her youth; yet she had hesitated not
to sacrifice him with her own hand. Such was the deed of the Indian
heroine--and such were the virtues of the unregenerated Greeks and Romans!




CHAPTER XIII.

  "Now where the wave, with loud unquiet song,
  Dash'd o'er the rocky channel, froths along,
  Or where the silver waters soothed to rest,
  The tree's tall shadow sleeps upon its breast."
  COLERIDGE.

The Indian camp remained for nearly three weeks on this spot, [Footnote:
Now known by the name of Cambelltown, though, there is but one log-house
and some pasture fields; it is a spot long used as a calling place for the
steamer that plies on the Otoanbee, between Gore's Landing on the Rice Lake
and Peterborough, to take in fire-wood.] and then early one morning the
wigwams were all taken down, and the canoes, six in number, proceeded
up the river. There was very little variety in the scenery to interest
Catharine; the river still kept its slow flowing course between low shores,
thickly clothed with trees, without an opening through which the eye might
pierce to form an idea of the country beyond; not a clearing, not a sight
or sound of civilized man was there to be seen or heard; the darting flight
of the wild birds as they flitted across from one side to the other, the
tapping of the woodpeckers or shrill cry of the blue jay, was all that was
heard, from sunrise to sunset, on that monotonous voyage. After many hours
a decided change was perceived in the current, which ran at a considerable
increase of swiftness, so that it required the united energy of both men
and women to keep the light vessels from drifting down the river again.
They were in the Rapids, [Footnote: Formerly known as Whitla's Rapids, now
the site of the Locks.] and it was hard work to stem the tide, and keep
the upward course of the waters. At length the rapids were passed, and
the weary Indian voyagers rested for a space on the bosom of a small but
tranquil lake. [Footnote: The little lake about a mile below Peterborough
and above the Locks, formerly girt in by woods of pine and beech and maple,
now entirely divested of trees and forming part of the suburbs of the town.
] The rising moon shed her silvery light upon the calm waters, and heaven's
stars shone down into its quiet depths, as the canoes with their dusky
freight parted the glittering rays with their light paddles. As they
proceeded onward the banks rose on either side, still fringed with pine,
cedar and oaks. At an angle of the lake the banks on either side ran
out into two opposite peninsulas, forming a narrow passage or gorge,
contracting the lake once more into the appearance of a broad river, much
wider from shore to shore than any other part they had passed through since
they had left the entrance at the Rice Lake.

Catharine became interested in the change of scenery, her eye dwelt with
delight on the forms of glorious spreading oaks and lofty pines, green
cliff-like shores and low wooded islands; while as they proceeded the sound
of rapid flowing waters met her ear, and soon the white and broken eddies
rushing along with impetuous course were seen by the light of the moon;
and while she was wondering if the canoes were to stem those rapids, at a
signal from the old chief, the little fleet was pushed to shore on a low
flat of emerald verdure nearly opposite to the last island. [Footnote:
Over the Otonabee, just between the rapids and the island, a noble and
substantial bridge has been built.]

Here, under the shelter of some beautiful spreading black oaks, the women
prepared to set up their wigwams. They had brought the poles and birch-bark
covering from the encampment below, and soon all was bustle and business;
unloading the canoes, and raising the tents. Even Catharine lent a willing
hand to assist the females in bringing up the stores, and sundry baskets
containing fruits and other small wares. She then kindly attended to the
Indian children, certain dark-skinned babes, who, bound upon their wooden
cradles, were either set up against the trunks of the trees, or swung to
some lowly depending branch, there to remain helpless and uncomplaining
spectators of the scene.

Catharine thought these Indian babes were almost as much to be pitied as
herself, only that they were unconscious of their imprisoned state, having
from birth been used to no better treatment, and moreover they were sure
to be rewarded by the tender caresses of living mothers when the season of
refreshment and repose arrived; but she alas! was friendless and alone, an
orphan girl, reft of father, mother, kindred and friends. One Father, one
Friend, poor Catharine, thou hadst, even He--the Father of the fatherless.

That night when the women and children were sleeping, Catharine stole out
of the wigwam, and climbed the precipitous bank beneath the shelter of
which the lodges had been erected. She found herself upon a grassy plain,
studded with majestic oaks and pines, so beautifully grouped that they
might have been planted by the hand of taste upon that velvet turf. It was
a delightful contrast to those dense dark forests through which for so many
many miles the waters of the Otonabee had flowed on monotonously; here
it was all wild and free, dashing along like a restive steed rejoicing in
its liberty, uncurbed and tameless.

Yes, here it was beautiful! Catharine gazed with joy upon the rushing
river, and felt her own heart expand as she marked its rapid course, as it
bounded murmuring and fretting over its rocky bed. "Happy, glorious waters!
you are not subject to the power of any living creature, no canoe can
ascend those surging waves; I would that I too, like thee, were free to
pursue my onward way--how soon would I flee away and be at rest!" Such
thoughts perhaps might have passed through the mind of the lonely captive
girl, as she sat at the foot of one giant oak, and looked abroad over those
moonlit waters, till, oppressed by the overwhelming sense of the utter
loneliness of the scene, the timid girl with faltering step hurried down
once more to the wigwams, silently crept to the mat where her bed was
spread, and soon forgot all her woes and wanderings in deep tranquil sleep.

Catharine wondered that the Indians in erecting their lodges always seemed
to prefer the low, level, and often swampy grounds by the lakes and rivers
in preference to the higher and more healthy elevations. So disregardful
are they of this circumstance, that they do not hesitate to sleep where the
ground is saturated with moisture. They will then lay a temporary flooring
of cedar or any other bark beneath their feet, rather than remove the tent
a few feet higher up, where a drier soil may always be found. This either
arises from stupidity or indolence, perhaps from both, but it is no doubt
the cause of much of the sickness that prevails among, them. With his feet
stretched to the fire the Indian cares for nothing else when reposing in
his wigwam, and it is useless to urge the improvement that might be made in
his comfort; he listens with a face of apathy, and utters his everlasting
guttural, which saves him the trouble of a more rational reply.

"Snow-bird" informed Catharine that the lodges would not again be removed
for some time, but that the men would hunt and fish, while the squaws
pursued their domestic labours. Catharine perceived that the chief of the
laborious part of the work fell to the share of the females, who were very
much more industrious and active than their husbands; these, when not out
hunting or fishing, were to be seen reposing in easy indolence under the
shade of the trees, or before the tent fires, giving themselves little
concern about anything that was going on. The squaws were gentle, humble,
and submissive; they bore without a murmur pain, labour, hunger, and
fatigue, and seemed to perform every task with patience and good humour.
They made the canoes, in which the men sometimes assisted them, pitched the
tents, converted the skins of the animals which the men shot into clothes,
cooked the victuals, manufactured baskets of every kind, wove mats, dyed
the quills of the porcupine, sewed the mocassins, and in short performed a
thousand tasks which it would be difficult to enumerate.

Of the ordinary household work, such as is familiar to European females,
they of course knew nothing; they had no linen to wash or iron, no floors
to clean, no milking of cows, nor churning of butter.

Their carpets were fresh cedar boughs spread upon the ground, and only
renewed when they became offensively dirty from the accumulation of fish
bones and other offal, which are carelessly flung down during meals. Of
furniture they had none, their seat the ground, their table the same, their
beds mats or skins of animals,--such were the domestic arrangements of the
Indian camp. [Footnote: Much improvement has taken place of late years in
the domestic economy of the Indians, and some of their dwellings are clean
and neat even for Europeans.] In the tent to which Catharine belonged,
which was that of the widow and her sons, a greater degree of order and
cleanliness prevailed than in any other, for Catharine's natural love of
neatness and comfort induced her to strew the floor with fresh cedar or
hemlock every day or two, and to sweep round the front of the lodge,
removing all unseemly objects from its vicinity. She never failed to wash
herself in the river, and arrange her hair with the comb that Louis had
made for her; and took great care of the little child, which she kept clean
and well fed. She loved this little creature, for it was soft and gentle,
meek and playful as a little squirrel, and the Indian mothers all looked
with kinder eyes upon the white maiden, for the loving manner in which
she tended their children. The heart of woman is seldom cold to those who
cherish their offspring, and Catharine began to experience the truth, that
the exercise of those human charities is equally beneficial to those who
give and those that receive; these things fall upon the heart as dew upon a
thirsty soil, giving and creating a blessing. But we will leave Catharine
for a short season, among the lodges of the Indians, and return to Hector
and Louis.




CHAPTER XIV.

  "Cold and forsaken, destitute of friends,
  And all good comforts else, unless some tree
  Whose speechless chanty doth better ours,
  With which the bitter east-winds made their sport
  And sang through hourly, hath invited thee
  To shelter half a day. Shall she be thus,
  And I draw in soft slumbers?"
  BRAUMONT AND FLETCHER.

It was near sunset before Hector and his cousin returned on the evening of
the eventful day that had found Catharine a prisoner on Long Island. They
had met with good success in hunting, and brought home a fine half-grown
fawn, fat and in good order. They were surprised at finding the fire nearly
extinguished, and no Catharine awaiting their return. There, it is true,
was the food that she had prepared for them, but she was not to be seen;
supposing that she had been tired of waiting for them, and had gone out to
gather strawberries, they did not at first feel very anxious, but ate some
of the rice and honey, for they were hungry with long fasting; and taking
some Indian meal cake in their hands, they went out to call her in, but no
trace of her was visible. They now became alarmed, fearing that she had set
off by herself to seek them, and had missed her way home again.

They hurried back to the happy valley--she was not there; to Pine-tree
Point--no trace of her there; to the edge of the mount that overlooked the
lake--no, she was not to be seen; night found them still unsuccessful in
their search. Sometimes they fancied that she had seated herself beneath
some tree and fallen asleep; but no one imagined the true cause, having
seen nothing of the Indians.

Again they retraced their steps back to the house; but they found her not
there. They continued their unavailing search till the moon setting left
them in darkness, and they laid down to rest, but not to sleep. The first
streak of dawn saw them again hurrying to and fro, calling in vain upon the
name of the loved and lost companion of their wanderings. Desolation had
fallen upon their house, and the evil which of all others they had most
feared, had happened to them.

Indiana, whose vigilance was more untiring, for she yielded not so easily
to grief and despair, now returned with the intelligence that she had
discovered the Indian trail, through the big ravine to the lake shore; she
had found the remains of a wreath of oak leaves which had been woven by
Catharine, and probably been about her hair; and she had seen the mark
of feet, Indian feet, on the soft clay, at the edge of the lake, and the
furrowing of the shingles by the pushing off of a canoe. It was evident
that she had been taken away from her home by these people. Poor Louis gave
way to transports of grief and despair; he knew the wreath, it was such
as Catharine often made for herself, and Mathilde, and petite Louise, and
Marie; his mother had taught her to make them; they were linked together
by the stalks, and formed a sort of leaf chain. The remembrance of many of
their joyous days of childhood made Louis weep sorrowful tears for happy
days, never to return again; he placed the torn relic in his breast, and
sadly turned away to hide his grief from Hector and the Indian girl.

Indiana now proposed searching the island for further traces, but advised
wariness in so doing. They saw, however, no smoke nor canoes. The Indians
had departed while they were searching the ravines and flats round Mount
Ararat, and the lake told no tales, The following day they ventured to land
on Long Island, and on going to the north side saw evident traces of a
temporary encampment having been made. This was all they could do, further
search was unavailing; as they found no trace of any violence having been
committed, they still cherished hopes that no personal harm had been done
to the poor captive, It was Indiana's opinion that, though a prisoner, she
was unhurt, as the Indians rarely killed women and children, unless
roused to do so by some signal act on the part of their enemies, when an
exterminating spirit of revenge induced them to kill and spare not; but
where no offence had been offered, they were not likely to take the life of
an helpless, unoffending female.

The Indian is not cruel for the wanton love of blood, but to gratify
revenge for some injury done to himself, or to his tribe; but it was
difficult to still the terrible apprehensions that haunted the minds of
Louis and Hector. They spent much time in searching the northern shores and
the distant islands, in the vain hope of finding her, as they still thought
the camp might have been moved to the opposite side of the lake.

Inconsolable for the loss of their beloved companion, Hector and Louis no
longer took interest in what was going on; they hardly troubled themselves
to weed the Indian corn, in which they had taken such great delight; all
now seemed to them flat, stale, and unprofitable; they wandered listlessly
to and fro, silent and sad; the sunshine had departed from their little
dwelling; they ate little, and talked less, each seeming absorbed in his
own painful reveries.

In vain the gentle Indian girl strove to revive their drooping spirits;
they seemed insensible to her attentions, and often left her for hours
alone. They returned one evening about the usual hour of sunset, and missed
their meek, uncomplaining guest from the place she was wont to occupy. They
called, but there was none to reply--she too was gone. They hurried to the
shore just time enough to see the canoe diminishing to a mere speck upon
the waters, in the direction of the mouth of the river; they called to her
in accents of despair, to return, but the wind wafted back no sound to
their ears, and soon the bark was lost to sight, and they sat them down
disconsolately on the shore.

"What is she doing?" said Hector; "this is cruel to abandon us thus."

"She has gone up the river, with the hope of bringing us some tidings of
Catharine," said Louis. "How came you to think that such is her intention?"

"I heard her say the other day that she would go and bring her back, or
die."

"What! do you think she would risk the vengeance of the old chief whose
life she attempted to take?"

"She is a brave girl; she does not fear pain or death to serve those she
loves."

"Alas!" said Hector, "she will perish miserably and to no avail; they would
not restore our dear sister, even at the sacrifice of Indiana's life."

"How can she, unprotected and alone, dare such perils? Why did she not tell
us? we would have shared her danger."

"She feared for our lives more than for her own; that poor Indian girl has
a noble heart. I care not now what befals us, we have lost all that made
life dear to us," said Louis gloomily, sinking his head between his knees.

"Hush, Louis, you are older than I, and ought to bear these trials with
more courage. It was our own fault, Indiana's leaving us, we left her so
much alone to pine after her lost companion; she seemed to think that we
did not care for her. Poor Indiana, she must have felt lonely and sad." "I
tell you what we will do, Hec.--make a log canoe. I found an old battered
one lying on the shore, not far from Pine-tree Point; we have an axe and a
tomahawk,--what should hinder us from making one like it?"

"True! we will set about it to-morrow."

"I wish it were morning, that we might set to work to cut down a good pine
for the purpose."

"As soon as it is done, we will go up the river; anything is better than
this dread suspense and inaction."

The early dawn saw the two cousins busily engaged chopping at a tree of
suitable dimensions, and they worked hard all that day, and the next, and
the next, before the canoe was hollowed out, and then, owing to their
inexperience and the bluntness of their tools, their first attempt proved
abortive; it was too heavy at one end, and did not balance well in the
water.

Louis, who had been quite sure of success, was disheartened; not so Hector.

"Do not let us give it up; my maxim is perseverance; let us try again, and
again--aye! and a third and a fourth time. I say, never give it up, that is
the way to succeed at last."

"You have ten times my patience, Hec." "Yes! but you are more ingenious
than I, and are excellent at starting an idea."

"We are a good pair then for partnership."

"We will begin anew; and this time I hope we shall profit by our past
blunders."

"Who would imagine that it is now more than a month since we lost
Catharine!"

"I know it, a long, long, weary month," replied Louis, and he struck his
axe sharply into the bark of the pine as he spoke, and remained silent for
some minutes. The boys, wearied by chopping down the tree, rested from
their work, and sat down on the side of the condemned canoe to resume their
conversation. Suddenly Louis grasped Hector's arm, and pointed to a bark
canoe that appeared making for the westernmost point of the island. Hector
started to his feet, exclaiming, "It is Indiana returned!"

"Nonsense! Indiana!--it is no such thing. Look you, it is a stout man in a
blanket coat."

"The Indians?" asked Hector inquiringly.

"I do not think he looks like an Indian; but let us watch. What is he
doing?"

"Fishing. See now, he has just caught a fine bass--another--he has great
luck-now he is pushing the canoe ashore."

"That man does not move like an Indian--hark! he is whistling. I ought to
know that tune. It sounds like the old chanson my father used to sing;" and
Louis, raising his voice, began to sing the words of an old French Canadian
song, which we will give in the English as we heard it sung by an old
lumberer.

  "Down by those banks where the pleasant waters flow,
  Through the wild woods we'll wander, and we'll chase the buffalo.
  And we'll chase the buffalo."

"Hush, Louis! you will bring the man over to us," said Hector.

"The very thing I am trying to do mon ami. This is our country, and that
may be his; but we are lords here, and two to one--so I think he will not
be likely to treat us ill. I am a man now, and so are you, and he is but
one, so he must mind how he affronts us," replied Louis laughing.

"I wish the old fellow was inclined to be sociable. Hark, if he is not
singing now! aye, and the very chorus of the old song,"--and Louis raised
his voice to its highest pitch as he repeated,

  "Through the wild woods well wander,
  And well chase the buffalo--
  And we'll chase the buflalo."

"What a pity I have forgotten the rest of that dear old song. I used to
listen with open ears to it when I was a boy. I never thought to hear it
again, and to hear it here of all places in the world!"

"Come, let us go on with our work," said Hector, with something like
impatience in his voice; and the strokes of his axe fell once more in
regular succession on the log; but Louis's eye was still on the mysterious
fisher, whom he could discern lounging on the grass and smoking his pipe.
"I do not think he sees or hears us," said Louis to himself, "but I think
I'll manage to bring him over soon"--and he set himself busily to work to
scrape up the loose chips and shavings, and soon began to strike fire with
his knife and flint.

"What are you about, Louis?" asked Hector. "Lighting a fire."

"It is warm enough without a fire, I am sure."

"I know that, but I want to attract the notice of yonder tiresome
fisherman."

"And perhaps bring a swarm of savages down upon us, who may be lurking in
the bushes of the island."

"Pooh, pooh! Hec.:--there are no savages. I am weary of this
place--anything is better than this horrible solitude." And Louis fanned
the flame into a rapid blaze, and heaped up the light dry branches till
it soared up among the bushes. Louis watched the effect of his fire, and
rubbed his hands gleefully as the bark canoe was pushed off from the
island, and a few vigorous strokes of the paddle sent it dancing over the
surface of the calm lake.

Louis waved his cap above his head with a cheer of welcome as the vessel
lightly glided into the little cove, near the spot where the boys were
chopping, and a stout-framed, weather-beaten man, in a blanket coat, also
faded and weather-beaten, with a red worsted sash and worn mocassins,
sprung upon one of the timbers of Louis's old raft, and gazed with a keen
eye upon the lads. Each party silently regarded the other. A few rapid
interrogations from the stranger, uttered in the broad patois of the Lower
Province, were answered in a mixture of broken French and English by Louis.

A change like lightning passed over the face of the old man as he cried
out--"Louis Perron, son of my ancient compagnon."

"Oui! oui!"--with eyes sparkling through tears of joy, Louis threw himself
into the broad breast of Jacob Morelle, his father's friend and old
lumbering comrade.

"Hector, son of la belle Catharine Perron,--and Hector, in his turn,
received the affectionate embrace of the warm-hearted old man.

"Who would have thought of meeting with the children of my old comrade here
at the shore of the Rice Lake?--oh! what a joyful meeting!"

Jacob had a hundred questions to ask: Where were their parents? did they
live on the Plains now? how long was it since they had left the Cold
Springs? were there any more little ones? and so forth.

The boys looked sorrowfully at each other. At last the old man stopped for
want of breath, and remarked their sad looks.

"What, mes fils, are your parents dead? Ah well! I did not think to have
outlived them; but they have not led such healthy lives as old Jacob
Morelle--hunting, fishing, lumbering, trapping,--those are the things to
harden a man and make him as tough as a stock-fish--eh! mes enfans, is it
not so?"

Hector then told the old lumberer how long they had been separated from
their families, and by what sad accident they had been deprived of the
society of their beloved sister. When they brought their narrative down to
the disappearance of Catharine, the whole soul of the old trapper seemed
moved--he started from the log on which they were sitting, and with one of
his national asseverations, declared "That la bonne fille should not remain
an hour longer than he could help among those savage wretches. Yes, he, her
father's old friend, would go up the river and bring her back in safety, or
leave his grey scalp behind him among the wigwams."

"It is too late, Jacob, to think of starting today," said Hector. "Come
home with us, and eat some food, and rest a bit."

"No need of that, my son. I have a lot of fish here in the canoe, and
there is an old shanty on the island yonder, if it be still standing,--the
Trapper's Fort I used to call it some years ago. We will go off to the
island and look for it."

"No need for that," replied Louis, "for though I can tell you the old place
is still in good repair, for we used it this very spring as a boiling
house for our maple sap, yet we have a better place of our own nearer at
hand--just two or three hundred yards over the brow of yonder hill. So come
with us, and you shall have a good supper, and bed to lie upon."

"And you have all these, boys!" said Jacob opening his merry black eyes, as
they came in sight of the little log-house and the field of green corn. The
old man praised the boys for their industry and energy. "Ha! here is old
Wolfe too," as the dog roused himself from the hearth and gave one of his
low grumbling growls. He had grown dull and dreamy, and instead of going
out as usual with the young hunters, he would lie for hours dozing before
the dying embers of the fire. He pined for the loving hand that used to pat
his sides, and caress his shaggy neck, and pillow his great head upon her
lap, or suffer him to put his huge paws upon her shoulders, while he licked
her hands and face; but she was gone, and the Indian girl was gone, and
the light of the shanty had gone with them. Old Wolfe seemed dying of
sorrow.

That evening as Jacob sat on the three-legged stool, smoking his short
Indian pipe, he again would have the whole story of their wanderings over,
and the history of all their doings and contrivances.

"And how far, mes enfans, do you think you are from the Cold Springs?"

"At least twenty miles, perhaps fifty, for it is a long long time now since
we left home, three summers ago."

"Well, boys, you must not reckon distance by the time you have been
absent," said the old "Now I know the distance through the woods, for I
have passed through them on the Indian trail, and by my reckoning as the
bee flies, it cannot be more than seven or eight miles--no, nor that
either."

The boys opened their eyes. "Jacob, is this possible? So near, and yet to
us the distance has been as great as though it were a hundred miles or
more."

"I tell you what, boys, that is the provoking part of it. I remember when
I was out on the St. John's, lumbering, missing my comrades, and I was
well-nigh starving, when I chanced to come back to the spot where we
parted; and I verily believe I had not been two miles distant the whole
eight days that I was moving round and round, and backward and forward,
just in a circle, because, d'ye see, I followed the sun, and that led me
astray the whole time."

"Was that when you well-nigh roasted the bear?" asked Louis, with a sly
glance at Hector.

"Well, no; that was another time; your father was out with me then." And
old Jacob, knocking the ashes out of his pipe, settled himself to recount
the adventure of the bear. Hector, who had heard Louis's edition of the
roast bear, was almost impatient at being forced to listen to old Jacob's
long-winded history, which included about a dozen other stories, all tagged
on to this, like links of a lengthened chain; and was not sorry when the
old lumberer, taking his red nightcap out of his pocket, at last stretched
himself out on a buffalo skin that he had brought up from the canoe, and
soon was soundly sleeping.

The morning was yet grey when the old man shook himself from his slumber,
which, if not deep, had been loud; and after having roused up a good fire,
which, though the latter end of July, at that dewy hour was not unwelcome,
he lighted his pipe, and began broiling a fish on the coals for his
breakfast; and was thus engaged when Hector and Louis wakened.

"Mes enfans," said Jacob, "I have been turning over in my mind about your
sister, and have come to the resolution of going up the river alone without
any one to accompany me. I know the Indians; they are a suspicious people,
they deal much in stratagems, and they are apt to expect treachery in
others. Perhaps they have had some reason; for the white men have not
always kept good faith with them, which I take to be the greater shame, as
they have God's laws to guide and teach them to be true and just in their
dealing, which the poor benighted heathen have not, the more's the pity.
Now, d'ye see, if the Indians see two stout lads with me, they will say to
themselves, there may be more left behind, skulking in ambush. So, boys, I
go to the camp alone; and, God willing, I will bring back your sister,
or die in the attempt. I shall not go single-handed; see, I have here
scarlet-cloth, beads, and powder and shot. I carry no firewater; it is a
sin and a shame to tempt these poor wretches to their own destruction; it
makes fiends of them at once."

It was to no purpose that Hector and Louis passionately besought old Jacob
to let them share the dangers of the expedition; the old man was firm, and
would not be moved from his purpose.

"Look you, boys," he said, "if I do not return by the beginning of the rice
harvest, you may suppose that evil has befallen me and the girl; then I
would advise you to take care for your own safety, for if they do not
respect my grey head, neither will they spare your young ones. In such
case, make yourselves a good canoe--a dug-out [Footnote: Log canoe.] will
do--and go down the lake till you are stopped by the rapids; [Footnote:
Crook's Rapids.] make a portage there; but as your craft is too weighty to
carry far, e'en leave her and chop out another, and go down to the Falls;
[Footnote: Heeley's Falls, on the Trent.] then, if you do not like to be
at any further trouble, you may make out your journey to the Bay [Footnote:
Bay Quinte.] on foot, coasting along the river; there you will fall in
with settlers who know old Jacob Morelle--aye, and your two fathers--and
they will put you in the way of returning home. If I were to try ever so to
put you on the old Indian trail in the woods, though I know it myself right
well, you might be lost, and maybe never return home again. I leave my
traps and my rifle with you; I shall not need them: if I come back I may
claim the things; if not, they are yours. So now I have said my say, had
my _talk_, as the Indians say. Farewell. But first let us pray to Him who
alone can bring this matter to a safe issue." And the old man devoutly
kneeled down, and prayed for a blessing on his voyage and on those he was
leaving; and then hastened down to the beach, and the boys, with full
hearts, watched the canoe till it was lost to their sight on the wide
waters of the lake.




CHAPTER XV.

  "Where wild in woods the lordly savage ran."
  DRYDEN.

What changes a few years make in places! That spot over which the Indians
roved, free of all control, is now a large and wide-spreading town. Those
glorious old trees are fast fading away, the memory only of them remains to
some of the first settlers, who saw them twenty-five years ago, shadowing
the now open market-place; the fine old oaks have disappeared, but the
green emerald turf that they once shaded still remains. The wild rushing
river still pours down its resistless spring floods, but its banks have
been levelled, and a noble bridge now spans its rapid waters. It has seen
the destruction of two log-bridges, but this new, substantial, imposing
structure bids fair to stand from generation to generation. The Indian
regards it with stupid wonder: he is no mechanic; his simple canoe of birch
bark is his only notion of communication from one shore to another. The
towns-people and country settlers view it with pride and satisfaction,
as a means of commerce and agricultural advantage. That lonely hill, from
which Catharine viewed the rapid-flowing river by moonlight, and marvelled
at its beauty and its power, is now the Court-house Hill, the seat of
justice for the district,--a fine, substantial edifice; its shining roof
and pillared portico may be seen from every approach to the town. That grey
village spire, with its groves of oak and pine, how invitingly it stands!
those trees that embower it, once formed a covert for the deer. Yonder
scattered groups of neat white cottages, each with its garden of flowers
and fruit, are spread over what was once an open plain, thinly planted with
poplar, oaks, and pine. See, there is another church; and nearer, towards
the west end of the town, on that fine slope, stands another, and another.
That sound that falls upon the ear is not the rapids of the river, but the
dash of mill wheels and mill dams, worked by the waters of that lovely
winding brook which has travelled far through woods and deep forest dingles
to yield its tribute to the Otonabee. There is the busy post-office, on the
velvet carpet of turf; a few years, yes, even a few years ago, that spot
was a grove of trees. The neat log building that stood then alone there,
was inhabited by the Government Agent, now Colonel Macdonald, and groups
of Indians might be seen congregated on the green, or reposing under the
trees, forming meet subjects for the painter's pencil, for he knew them
well, and was kind to them.

The Indian only visits the town, once the favourite site for his hunting
lodge, to receive his annual government presents, to trade his simple wares
of basket and birch-bark work, to bring in his furs, or maybe to sell his
fish or venison, and take back such store goods as his intercourse with his
white brethren has made him consider necessary to his comforts, to supply
wants which have now become indispensable, before undreamed of. He
traverses those populous, busy streets, he looks round upon dwellings, and
gay clothes, and equipages, and luxuries which he can neither obtain nor
imitate; and feels his spirit lowered--he is no more a people--the tide of
intellect has borne him down, and swept his humble wigwam from the earth.
He, too, is changing: he now dwells, for the most part, in villages, in
houses that cannot be moved away at his will or necessity; he has become a
tiller of the ground, his hunting expeditions are prescribed within narrow
bounds, the forest is disappearing, the white man is everywhere. The Indian
must also yield to circumstances; he submits patiently. Perhaps he
murmurs in secret; but his voice is low, it is not heard; he has no
representative in the senate to take interest in his welfare, to plead in
his behalf. He is anxious, too, for the improvement of his race: he gladly
listens to the words of life, and sees with joy his children being brought
up in the fear and nurture of the Lord; he sees with pride some of his own
blood going forth on the mission of love to other distant tribes; he is
proud of being a Christian; and if there be some that still look back to
the freedom of former years, and talk of "the good old times," when they
wandered free as the winds and waters through those giant woods, they are
fast fading away. A new race is rising up, and the old hunter will soon
become a being unknown in Canada.

There is an old gnarled oak that stands, or lately stood, on the turfy
bank, just behind the old Government-house (as the settlers called it),
looking down the precipitous cliff on the river and the islands. The
Indians called it "the white girl's rest," for it was there that Catharine
delighted to sit, above the noise and bustle of the camp, to sing her
snatches of old Scottish songs, or pray the captive exile's prayer, unheard
and unseen.

The setting sun was casting long shadows of oak and weeping elm athwart the
waters of the river; the light dip of the paddle had ceased on the water,
the baying of hounds and life-like stirring sounds from the lodges came
softened to the listening ear. The hunters had come in with the spoils of a
successful chase; the wigwam fires are flickering and crackling, sending up
their light columns of thin blue smoke among the trees; and now a goodly
portion of venison is roasting on the forked sticks before the fires. Each
lodge has its own cooking utensils. That jar embedded in the hot embers
contains sassafras tea, an aromatic beverage, in which the squaws delight
when they are so fortunate as to procure a supply. This has been brought
from the Credit, far up in the west, by a family who have come down on a
special mission from some great chief to his brethren on the Otonabee, and
the squaws have cooked some in honour of the guests. That pot that sends up
such a savoury steam is venison pottage, or soup, or stew, or any name you
choose to give the Indian mess that is concocted of venison, wild rice, and
herbs. Those tired hounds that lay stretched before the fire have been out,
and now they enjoy the privilege of the fire, some praise from the hunters,
and receive withal an occasional reproof from the squaws, if they approach
their wishful noses too close to the tempting viands.

The elder boys are shooting at a mark on yonder birch-tree; the girls are
playing or rolling on the grass; "The Snow-bird" is seated on the floor of
the wigwam braiding a necklace of sweet grass, which she confines in links
by means of little bands of coloured quills; Catharine is working mocassins
beside her;--a dark shadow falls across her work from the open tent door--
an exclamation of surprise and displeasure from one of the women makes
Catharine raise her eyes to the doorway; there, silent, pale, and
motionless, the mere shadow of her former self, stands Indiana--a gleam of
joy lights for an instant her large lustrous eyes. Amazement and delight
at the sight of her beloved friend for a moment deprives Catharine of the
power of speech; then terror for the safety of her friend takes place of
her joy at seeing her. She rises regardless of the angry tones of the
Indian woman's voice, and throws her arms about Indiana as if to shield her
from threatened anger, and sobs her welcome in her arms.

"Indiana, dear sister! how came you hither, and for what purpose?"

"To free you, and then die," was the soft low tremulous answer. "Follow
me." Catharine, wondering at the calm and fearless manner with which the
young Mohawk waved back the dusky matron who approached as if with the
design of laying hands upon her unwelcome guest, followed with beating
heart till they stood in the entrance of the lodge of the Bald Eagle; it
was filled with the hunters, who were stretched on skins on the floor
reposing in quiet after the excitement of the chase.

The young Mohawk bent her head down and crossed her arms, an attitude of
submission, over her breast as she stood in the opening of the lodge; but
she spoke no word till the old chief waving back the men, who starting to
their feet were gathering round him as if to shield him from danger, and
sternly regarding her, demanded from whence she came and for what purpose.

"To submit myself to the will of my Ojebwa father," was the meek reply.
"May the daughter of the Bald Eagle's enemy speak to her great father?"

"Say on," was the brief reply, "the Bald Eagle's ears are open."

"The Bald Eagle is a mighty chief, the conqueror of his enemies and the
father of his people," replied the Mohawk girl, and again was silent. "The
Mohawk squaw speaks well; let her say on."

"The heart of the Mohawk is an open flower, it can be looked upon by the
eye of the Great Spirit. She speaks the words of truth. The Ojebwa chief
slew his enemies, they had done his good heart wrong; he punished them for
the wrong they wrought; he left none living in the lodges of his enemies
save one young squaw, the daughter of a brave, the grand-daughter of the
Black Snake. The Bald Eagle loves even an enemy that is not afraid to raise
the war-whoop or fling the tomahawk in battle. The young girl's mother was
a _brave."_ She paused, while her proud eye was fixed on the face of her
aged auditor. He nodded assent, and she resumed, while a flush of emotion
kindled her pale cheek and reddened her lips,--

"The Bald Eagle brought the lonely one to his lodge, he buried the hatchet
and the scalping knife, he bade his squaws comfort her; but her heart was
lonely, she pined for the homes of her fathers. She said, I will revenge my
father, my mother, and my brothers and sisters; and her heart burned within
her: but her hand was not strong to shed blood, the Great Spirit was about
my Ojebwa father; she failed, and would have fled, for an arrow was in her
flesh. The people of the Bald Eagle took her, they brought her down the
great river to the council hill, they bound her with thongs and left her to
die. She prayed, and the Great Spirit heard her prayer and sent her help.
The white man came; his heart was soft; he unbound her, he gave water
to cool her hot lips, he led her to his lodge. The white squaw (and she
pointed to Catharine) was there, she bound up her wounds, she laid her on
her own bed, she gave her meat and drink, and tended her with love. She
taught her to pray to the Good Spirit, and told her to return good for
evil, to be true and just, kind and merciful. The hard heart of the young
girl became soft as clay when moulded for the pots and she loved her white
sister and brothers, and was happy. The Bald Eagle's people came when my
white brothers were at peace, they found a trembling fawn within the lodge,
they led her away, they left tears and loneliness where joy and peace had
been. The Mohawk squaw could not see the hearth of her white brothers
desolate; she took the canoe, she to the lodge of the great father of his
tribe, and she says to him, 'Give back the white squaw to her home on the
Rice Lake, and take in her instead the rebellious daughter of the Ojebwa's
enemy, to die or be his servant; she fears nothing now the knife or the
tomahawk, the arrow or the spear: her life is in the hand of the great
chief.'" She sank on her knees as she spoke these last words and bowing
down her head on her breast remained motionless as a statue.

There was silence for some minutes, and then the old man rose and said:--

"Daughter of a brave woman, thou hast spoken long, and thou hast spoken
well; the ears of the Bald Eagle have been open. The white squaw shall be
restored to her brother's lodge--but thou remainest. I have spoken."

Catharine in tears cast her arms around her disinterested friend and
remained weeping--how could she accept this great sacrifice? She in her
turn pleaded for the life and liberty of the Mohawk, but the chief turned
a cold ear to her passionate and incoherent pleading. He was weary--he was
impatient of further excitement--he coldly motioned to them to withdraw;
and the friends in sadness retired to talk over all that had taken place
since that sad day when Catharine was taken from her home. While her heart
was joyful at the prospect of her own release, it was clouded with fears
for the uncertain fate of her beloved friend.

"They will condemn me to a cruel death," said Indiana, "but I can suffer
and die for my white sister."

That night the Indian girl slept sweetly and tranquilly beside Catharine;
but Catharine could not sleep; she communed with her own heart in the still
watches of the night--it seemed as if a new life had been infused within
her. She no longer thought and felt as a child; the energies of her mind
had been awakened, ripened into maturity as it were, and suddenly expanded.
When all the inmates of the lodges were profoundly sleeping, Catharine
arose,--a sudden thought had entered into her mind, and she hesitated not
to put her design into execution. There was no moon, but a bright arch of
light spanned the forest to the north; it was mild and soft as moonlight,
but less bright, and cast no shadow across her path; it showed her the
sacred tent of the widow of the murdered Mohawk. With noiseless step
she lifted aside the curtain of skins that guarded it, and stood at the
entrance. Light as was her step, it awakened the sleeper; she raised
herself on her arm and looked up with a dreamy and abstracted air as
Catharine, stretching forth her hand in tones low and tremulous, thus
addressed her in the Ojebwa tongue:--

"The Great Spirit sends me to thee, O woman of much sorrow; he asks of
thee a great deed of mercy and goodness. Thou hast shed blood, and he is
angry. He bids thee to save the life of an enemy--the blood of thy murdered
husband flows in her veins. See that thou disobey not the words that he
commands."

She dropped the curtain and retired as she had come, with noiseless step,
and lay down again in the tent beside Indiana. Her heart beat as though it
would burst its way through her bosom. What had she done?--what dared? She
had entered the presence of that terrible woman alone, at the dead hour of
night! she had spoken bold and presumptuous words to that strange being
whom even her own people hardly dared to approach uncalled-for! Sick with
terror at the consequences of her temerity, Catharine cast her trembling
arms about the sleeping Indian girl, and hiding her head in her bosom, wept
and prayed till sleep came over her wearied spirit. It was late when she
awoke. She was alone: the lodge was empty. A vague fear seized her: she
hastily arose to seek her friend. It was evident that some great event was
in preparation. The Indian men had put on the war-paint, and strange and
ferocious eyes were glancing from beneath their shaggy locks. A stake was
driven in the centre of the cleared space in front of the chief's lodge:
there, bound, she beheld her devoted friend; pale as ashes, but with a calm
unshaken countenance, she stood. There was no sign of woman's fear in her
fixed dark eye, which quailed not before the sight of the death-dooming men
who stood round her, armed with their terrible weapons of destruction.
Her thoughts seemed far away: perhaps they were with her dead kindred,
wandering in that happy land to which the Indian hopes to go after life;
or, inspired with the new hope which had been opened to her, she was
looking to Him who has promised a crown of life to such as believe in His
name. She saw not the look of agony with which Catharine regarded her; and
the poor girl, full of grief, sunk down at the foot of a neighbouring tree,
and burying her face between her knees, wept and prayed--oh! how fervently!
A hope crept to her heart--even while the doom of Indiana seemed
darkest--that some good might yet accrue from her visit to the wigwam of
the Great Medicine squaw. She knew that the Indians have great belief in
omens, and warnings, and spirits, both good and evil; she knew that her
mysterious appearance in the tent of the Mohawk's widow would be construed
by her into spiritual agency; and her heart was strengthened by this hope.
Yet just now there seems little reason to encourage hope: the war-whoop is
given, the war-dance is begun--first slow, and grave, and measured; now
louder, and quicker, and more wild become both sound and movement. But why
is it hushed again? See, a strange canoe appears on the river; anon an
old weather-beaten man, with firm step, appears on the greensward and
approaches the area of the lodge.

The Bald Eagle greets him with friendly courtesy; the dance and death-song
are hushed; a treaty is begun. It is for the deliverance of the captives.
The chief points to Catharine--she is free: his white brother may take
her--she is his. But the Indian law of justice must take its course; the
condemned, who raised her hand against an Ojebwa chief, must die. In vain
were the tempting stores of scarlet cloth and beads for the women, with
powder and shot, laid before the chief: the arrows of six warriors were
fitted to the string, and again the dance and song commenced, as if, like
the roll of the drum and clangour of the trumpet, it were necessary to the
excitement of strong and powerful feelings, and the suppression of all
tenderer emotions.

And now a wild and solemn voice was heard, unearthly in its tones, rising
above the yells of those savage men. At that sound every cheek became pale:
it struck upon the ear as some funeral wail. Was it the death-song of the
captive girl bound to that fearful stake? No; for she stands unmoved, with
eyes raised heavenward, and lips apart--

  "In still, but brave despair."

Shrouded in a mantle of dark cloth, her long black hair unbound and
streaming over her shoulders, appears the Mohawk widow, the daughter of the
Ojebwa chief. The gathering throng fall back as she approaches, awed by her
sudden appearance among them. She stretches out a hand on which dark stains
are visible--it is the blood of her husband, sacrificed by her on that
day of fearful deeds: it has never been effaced. In the name of the Great
Spirit she claims the captive girl--the last of that devoted tribe--to
be delivered over to her will. Her right to this remnant of her murdered
husband's family is acknowledged. A knife is placed in her hand, while a
deafening yell of triumph bursts from the excited squaws, as this their
great high-priestess, as they deemed her, advanced to the criminal. But it
was not to shed the heart's blood of the Mohawk girl, but to severe the
thongs that bound her to the deadly stake, for which that glittering blade
was drawn, and to bid her depart in peace whithersoever she would go.

Then, turning to the Bald Eagle, she thus addressed him: "At the dead of
night, when the path of light spanned the sky, a vision stood before mine
eyes. It came from the Great and Good Spirit, and bade me to set free the
last of a murdered race whose sun had gone down in blood shed by my hand
and by the hands of my people. The vision told me that if I did this my
path should henceforth be peace, and that I should go to the better land
and be at rest if I did this good deed." She then laid her hands on the
head of the young Mohawk, blessed her, and enveloping herself in the dark
mantle, slowly retired back to her solitary tent once more.




CHAPTER XVI.

  "Hame, hame, hame,
  Hame I soon shall be,
  Hame, hame, hame,
  In mine own countrie."--_Scotch Ballad._

Old Jacob and Catharine, who had been mute spectators of the scene so full
of interest to them, now presented themselves before the Ojebwa chief, and
besought leave to depart. The presents were again laid before him, and this
time were graciously accepted. Catharine in distributing the beads and
cloth took care that the best portion should fall to the grand-daughter
of the chief, the pretty good-humoured Snowbird. The old man was not
insensible to the noble sacrifice which had been made by the devoted
Indiana, and he signified his forgiveness of her fault by graciously
offering to adopt her as his child, and to give her in marriage to one
of his grandsons, an elder brother of the Snowbird; but the young girl
modestly but firmly refused this mark of favour, for her heart yearned for
those whose kindness had saved her from death, and who had taught her to
look beyond the things of this world to a brighter and a better state of
being. She said, "She would go with her white sister, and pray to God to
bless her enemies, as the Great Spirit had taught her to do."

It seems a lingering principle of good in human nature, that the exercise
of mercy and virtue opens the heart to the enjoyment of social happiness.
The Indians, no longer worked up by excitement to deeds of violence, seemed
disposed to bury the hatchet of hatred, and the lodge was now filled with
mirth, and the voice of gladness, feasting, and dancing. A covenant of
peace and good-will was entered upon by old Jacob and the chief, who bade
Catharine tell her brothers that from henceforth they should be free to
hunt the deer, fish, or shoot the wild fowl of the lake, whenever they
desired to do so, "he the Bald Eagle had said so."

On the morrow, with the first dawn of day, the old trapper was astir; the
canoe was ready, with fresh cedar boughs strewed at the bottom. A supply of
parched rice and dried fish had been presented by the Indian chief for the
voyage, that his white brother and the young girls might not suffer, from
want. At sun-rise the old man led his young charges to the lodge of the
Bald Eagle, who took a kindly farewell of them. "The Snow-bird" was
sorrowful, and her bright laughing eyes were dimmed with tears at parting
with Catharine; she was a gentle loving thing, as soft and playful as the
tame fawn that nestled its velvet head against her arm. She did not let
Catharine depart without many tokens of her regard, the work of her own
hands,--bracelets of porcupine quills cut in fine pieces and strung in
fanciful patterns, [Footnote: Appendix M] mocassins richly wrought, and
tiny bark dishes and boxes, such as might have graced a lady's work-table,
so rare was their workmanship.

Just as they were about to step into the canoe "the Snow-bird" reappeared,
bearing a richly worked bark box, "From the Great Medicine," she said in
a low voice, "To the daughter of the Mohawk _brave._" The box contained a
fine tunic, soft as a lady's glove, embroidered and fringed, and a fillet
of scarlet and blue feathers, with the wings and breast of the war-bird, as
shoulder ornaments. It was a token of reconciliation and good-will worthy
of a generous heart.

The young girl pressed the gifts to her bosom and to her lips
reverentially, and the hand that brought them to her heart, as she said in
her native tongue, "Tell the Great Medicine I kiss her in my heart, and
pray that she may have peace and joy till she departs for the spirit-land."

With joyful heart they bade adieu to the Indian lodges, and rejoiced in
being once more afloat on the bosom of the great river. To Catharine the
events of the past hours seemed like a strange bewildering dream; she
longed for the quiet repose of home; and how gladly did she listen to that
kind old man's plans for restoring her brothers and herself to the arms
of their beloved parents. How often did she say to herself, Oh that I had
wings like a dove, for then would I flee away and be at rest!--in the
shelter of that dear mother's arms whom she now pined for with a painful
yearning of the heart that might well be called home sickness. But in spite
of anxious wishes, the little party were compelled to halt for the night
some few miles above the lake. There is on the eastern bank of the
Otonabee, a pretty rounded knoll, clothed with wild cherries, hawthorns and
pine-trees, just where a creek half hidden by alder and cranberry bushes,
works its way below the shoulder of the little eminence; this creek grows
broader and becomes a little stream, through which the hunters sometimes
paddle their canoes, as a short cut to the lower part of the lake near
Crook's Rapids. To this creek old Jacob steered his light craft, and
bidding the girls collect a few dry sticks and branches for an evening fire
on the sheltered side of the little bank, he soon lighted the pile into a
cheerful blaze by the aid of birch bark, the hunter's tinder--a sort of
fungus that is found in the rotten oak and maple-trees--and a knife and
flint; he then lifted the canoe, and having raised it on its side, by means
of two small stakes which he cut from a bush hard by, then spread down his
buffalo robe on the dry grass. "There is a tent fit for a queen to sleep
under, mes cheres filles," he said, eyeing his arrangements for their night
shelter with great satisfaction.

He then proceeded to bait his line, and in a few minutes had a dish of
splendid bass ready for the coals. Catharine selected a large flat block of
limestone on which the fish when broiled was laid; but old Jacob opened his
wide mouth and laughed, when she proceeded to lay her bush table with large
basswood leaves for platters. Such nicety he professed was unusual on a
hunter's table. He was too old a forester to care how his food was dished,
so that he had wherewithal to satisfy his hunger.

Many were the merry tales he told and the songs he sung, to wile away the
time, till the daylight faded from the sky, and the deep blue heavens were
studded with bright stars, which were mirrored in countless hosts deep deep
down in that calm waveless river, while thousands of fireflies lighted up
the dark recesses of the forest's gloom. High in the upper air the hollow
booming of the night-hawk was heard at intervals, and the wild cry of the
night-owl from a dead branch, shouting to its fellow, woke the silence of
that lonely river scene.

The old trapper stretched before the crackling fire, smoked his pipe or
hummed some French voyageur's song. Beneath the shelter of the canoe
soundly slept the two girls; the dark cheek of the Indian girl pillowed on
the arm of her fairer companion, her thick tresses of raven hair mingling
with the silken ringlets of the white maiden. They were a lovely pair--one
fair as morning, the other dark as night,

How lightly did they spring from their low bed, wakened by the early song
of the forest birds! The light curling mist hung in fleecy volumes upon
the river, like a flock of sheep at rest--the tinkling sound of the heavy
dew-drops fell in mimic showers upon the stream. See that red squirrel, how
lightly he runs along that fallen trunk--how furtively he glances with his
sharp bright eye at the intruders on his sylvan haunts! Hark! there is
a rustling among the leaves--what strange creature works its way to the
shore? A mud turtle--it turns, and now is trotting along the little sandy
ridge to some sunny spot, where, half buried, it may lie unseen near the
edge of the river. See that musk-rat, how boldly he plunges into the
stream, and, with his oarlike tail, stems the current till he gains in
safety the sedges on the other side.

What gurgling sound is that?--it attracts the practised ear of the old
hunter. What is that object which floats so steadily down the middle of the
stream, and leaves so bright a line in its wake?--it is a noble stag. Look
at the broad chest, with which he breasts the water so gallantly; see
how proudly he carries his antlered head; he has no fear in those lonely
solitudes--he has never heard the crack of the hunter's rifle--he heeds
not the sharp twang of that bowstring, till the arrow rankles in his neck,
and the crimson flood dyes the water around him--he turns, but it is only
to present a surer mark for the arrow of the old hunter's bow; and now the
noble beast turns to bay, and the canoe is rapidly launched by the hand of
the Indian girl--her eye flashes with the excitement--her whole soul is in
the chase--she stands up in the canoe, and steers it full upon the wounded
buck, while a shower of blows are dealt upon his head and neck with the
paddle. Catharine buries her face in her hands--she cannot bear to
look upon the sufferings of the noble animal. She will never make a
huntress--her heart is cast in too soft a mould. See they have towed the
deer ashore, and Jacob is in all his glory,--the little squaw is an Indian
at heart--see with what expertness she helps the old man; and now the great
business is completed, and the venison is stowed away at the bottom of the
canoe--they wash their hands in the river and come at Catharine's summons
to eat her breakfast.

The sun is now rising high above the pine-trees, the morning mist is also
rising and rolling off like a golden veil as it catches those glorious
rays--the whole earth seems wakening into new life--the dew has brightened
every leaf and washed each tiny flower-cup--the pines and balsams give
out their resinous fragrance--the aspens flutter and dance in the morning
breeze and return a mimic shower of dew-drops to the stream--the shores
become lower and flatter--the trees less lofty and more mossy--the stream
expands and wide beds of rushes spread out on either side--what beds of
snowy water-lilies--how splendid the rose tint of those perseicarias that
glow so brightly in the morning sun--the rushes look like a green meadow,
but the treacherous water lies deep below their grassy leaves--the deer
delights in these verdant aquatic fields, and see what flocks of red-wings
rise from among them as the canoe passes near--their bright shoulder-knots
glance like flashes of lightning in the sun-beams.

This low swampy island, filled with driftwood, these grey hoary trees, half
choked and killed with grey moss and lichens--those straggling alders and
black ash look melancholy--they are like premature old age, grey-headed
youths. That island divides the channel of the river--the old man takes
the nearest, the left hand, and now they are upon the broad Rice Lake, and
Catharine wearies her eye to catch the smoke of the shanty rising among the
trees--one after another the islands steal out into view--the capes, and
bays, and shores of the northern side are growing less distinct, Yon hollow
bay, where the beaver has hidden till now, backed by that bold sweep of
hills that look in the distance as if only covered with green ferns, with
here and there a tall tree, stately as a pine or oak--that is the spot
where Louis saw the landing of the Indians--now a rising village--Gores'
Landing. On yon lofty hill now stands the village church, its white tower
rising amongst the trees forms a charming object from the lake, and there
a little higher up, not far from the plank road, now stand pretty rural
cottages--one of these belong to the spirited proprietor of the village
that bears his name. That tasteful garden before the white cottage, to the
right, is Colonel Brown's, and there are pretty farms and cultivated spots;
but silence and loneliness reigned there at the time of which I write.

Where those few dark pines rise above the oak groves like the spires of
churches in a crowded city, is Mount Ararat. [Footnote: Appendix N.] The
Indian girl steers straight between the islands for that ark of refuge, and
Catharine's eyes are dimmed with grateful tears as she pictures to herself
the joyful greeting in store for her. In the overflowings of her gladness
she seizes the old man's rugged hand and kisses it, and flings her arms
about the Indian girl and presses her to her heart, when the canoe has
touched the old well-remembered landing place, and she finds herself so
near, so very near her lost home. How precious are such moments--how few we
have in life--they are created from our very sorrows--without our cares our
joys would be less lively; but we have no time to moralize--Catharine flies
with the speed of a young fawn, to climb the steep cliff-like shoulder of
that steep bank, and now, out of breath, stands at the threshold of her
log-house--how neat and nice it looks compared with the Indians' tents--the
little field of corn is green and flourishing--there is Hector's axe in a
newly-cut log--it is high noon--the boys ought to have been there taking
their mid-day meal, but the door is shut. Catharine lifts the wooden latch,
and steps in--the embers are nearly burned out, to a handful of grey
ashes--old Wolfe is not there--all is silent--and Catharine sits down
to still the beating of her heart and await the coming up of her slower
companions, and gladdens her mind with the hope that her brother and Louis
will soon be home--her eye wanders over every old familiar object--all
things seem much as she had left them, only the maize is in the ear and
the top feather waves gracefully with the summer breeze--it promises an
abundant crop; but that harvest is not to be gathered by the hands of the
young planters--it was left to the birds of the air and the beasts of the
field--to those humble reapers who sow not, neither do they gather into
barns, for their Heavenly Father feedeth them. While the two girls busied
themselves in preparing a fine roast of venison old Jacob stalked away over
the hills to search for the boys, and it was not long before he returned
with Hector and Louis.

I must not tell tales, or I might say what tears of joy were mingled with
the rapturous greetings with which Louis embraced his beloved cousin; or I
might tell that the bright flush that warmed the dusky cheek of the young
Indian, and the light that danced in her soft black eyes, owed its origin
to the kiss that was pressed on her red lips by her white brother. Nor will
we say whose hand held hers so long in his while Catharine related the
noble sacrifice made for her sake, and the perils encountered by the
devoted Indiana--whose eyes were moistened with tears as the horrors of
that fearful trial were described--or who stole out alone over the hills,
and sat him down in the hush and silence of the summer night to think of
the acts of heroism displayed by that untaught Indian girl, and to dream a
dream of youthful love; but with these things, my young readers, we have
nothing to do.

"And now, my children," said old Jacob, looking round the little dwelling,
"have you made up your minds to live and die here on the shores of this
lake, or do you desire again to behold your father's home? Do your young
hearts yearn after the hearth of your childhood?" "After our fathers'
home!" was Louis's emphatic reply. "After the home of our childhood!" was
Catharine's earnest answer. Hector's lips echoed his sister's words, while
a furtive troubled glance fell upon the orphan stranger; but her timid eye
was raised to his young face with a trusting look, as she would have said.
"Thy home shall be my home, thy God my God."

"Well, mon ami, I believe, if my old memory fails me not, I can strike the
Indian trail that used to lead to the Cold Springs over the pine hills. It
will not be difficult for an old trapper to find his way."

"For my part, I shall not leave this lovely spot without regret," said
Hector. "It would be a glorious place for a settlement--all that one could
desire--hill, and valley, and plain, wood and water. Well, I will try
and persuade my father to leave the Cold Springs, and come and settle
hereabouts. It would be delightful, would it not, Catharine, especially now
we are friends with the Indians."

With their heads full of pleasant schemes for the future, our young folks
laid them down that night to rest. In the morning they rose, packed up such
portable articles as they could manage to carry, and with full hearts sat
down to take their last meal in their home--in that home which sheltered
them so long--and then, with one accord, they knelt down upon its hearth,
so soon to be left in loneliness, and breathed a prayer to Him who had
preserved them thus far in their eventful lives, and then they journeyed
forth once more into the wilderness. There was one, however, of their
little band they left behind: this was the faithful old dog Wolfe. He
had pined during the absence of his mistress, and only a few days before
Catharine's return he had crept to the seat she was wont to occupy, and
there died. Louis and Hector buried him, not without great regret, beneath
the group of birch-trees on the brow of the slope near the corn-field.




CHAPTER XVII.

  "I will arise, and go to my father."--_New Testament_.

It is the hour of sunset; the sonorous sound of the cattle bells is heard,
as they slowly emerge from the steep hill path that leads to Maxwell and
Louis Perron's little clearing; the dark shadows are lengthening that those
wood-crowned hills cast over that sunny spot, an oasis in the vast forest
desert that man, adventurous, courageous man, has hewed for himself in the
wilderness. The little flock are feeding among the blackened stumps of the
uncleared chopping; those timbers have lain thus untouched for two long
years; the hand was wanting that should have given help in logging and
burning them up. The wheat is ripe for the sickle, and the silken beard of
the corn is waving like a fair girl's tresses in the evening breeze. The
tinkling fall of the cold spring in yonder bank falls soothingly on the
ear. Who comes from that low-roofed log cabin to bring in the pitcher of
water, that pale, careworn, shadowy figure that slowly moves along the
green pasture, as one without hope or joy; her black hair is shared with
silver, her cheek is pale as wax, and her hand is so thin, it looks as
though the light might be seen through if she held it towards the sun? It
is the heart-broken mother of Catharine and Hector Maxwell. Her heart has
been pierced with many sorrows; she cannot yet forget the children of her
love, her first-born girl and boy. Who comes to meet her, and with cheerful
voice chides her for the tear that seems ever to be lingering on that pale
cheek,--yet the premature furrows on that broad, sunburnt, manly brow
speak, too, of inward care? It is the father of Hector and Catharine. Those
two fine, healthy boys, in homespun blouses, that are talking so earnestly,
as they lean across the rail fence of the little wheat field, are Kenneth
and Donald; their sickles are on their arms; they have been reaping. They
hear the sudden barking of Bruce and Wallace, the hounds, and turn to see
what causes the agitation they display.

An old man draws near; he has a knapsack on his shoulders, which he casts
down on the corner of the stoup; he is singing a line of an old French
ditty; he raps at the open door. The Highlander bids him welcome, but
starts with glad surprise as his hand is grasped by the old trapper. "Ha,
Jacob Morelle, it is many a weary year since your step turned this way."
The tear stood in the eye of the soldier as he spoke.

"How is ma chere mere, and the young ones?" asked the old man, in a husky
voice--his kind heart was full. "Can you receive me, and those I have with
me, for the night? A spare corner, a shake-down, will do; we travellers in
the bush are no wise nice."

"The best we have, and kindly welcome; it is gude for saer een to see you,
Jacob. How many are ye in all?"

"There are just four, beside myself,--young people; I found them where they
had been long living, on a lonely lake, and I persuaded them to come with
me."

The strong features of the Highlander worked convulsively, as he drew his
faded blue bonnet over his eyes. "Jacob, did ye ken that we lost our eldest
bairns, some three summers since?" he faltered, in a broken voice.

"The Lord, in his mercy, has restored them to you, Donald, by my hand,"
said the trapper.

"Let me see, let me see my children. To him be the praise and the glory,"
ejaculated the pious father, raising his bonnet reverently from his head;
"and holy and blessed be his name for ever. I thought not to have seen this
day. Oh! Catharine, my dear wife, this joy will kill you."

In a moment his children were enfolded in his arms. It is a mistaken idea
that joy kills, it is a life restorer. Could you, my young readers, have
seen how quickly the bloom of health began to reappear on the faded cheek
of that pale mother, and how soon that dim eye regained its bright sparkle,
you would have said that joy does not kill.

"But where is Louis, dear Louis, our nephew, where is he?"

Louis whose impetuosity was not to be restrained by the caution of old
Jacob, had cleared the log fence at a bound, had hastily embraced his
cousins Kenneth and Donald, and in five minutes more had rushed into his
father's cottage, and wept his joy in the arms of father, mother, and
sisters by turns, before old Jacob had introduced the impatient Hector and
Catharine to their father.

"But while joy is in our little dwelling, who is this that sits apart upon
that stone by the log fence, her face bent sadly down upon het knees, her
long raven hair shading her features as with a veil," asked the Highlander
Maxwell, pointing as he spoke' to the spot where, unnoticed and unsharing
in the joyful recognition, sat the poor Indian girl. There was no paternal
embrace for her, no tender mother's kiss imprinted on that dusky cheek and
pensive brow--she was alone and desolate, in the midst of that scene of
gladness.

"It is my Indian sister," said Catharine, "she also must be your child;"
and Hector hurried to Indiana and half leading, half carrying the reluctant
girl, brought her to his parents and bade them be kind to and cherish the
young stranger, to whom they all owed so much.

I will not dwell upon the universal joy that filled that humble dwelling,
or tell the delight of Kenneth and Donald at the return of their lost
brother and sister, for my story hurries to a close.

Time passes on--years, long years have gone by since the return of the lost
children to their homes, and many changes have those years effected. The
log-houses have fallen to decay--a growth of young pines, a waste of
emerald turf with the charred logs that once formed part of the enclosure,
now, hardly serve to mark out the old settlement--no trace or record
remains of the first breakers of the bush, another race occupy the ground.
The traveller as he passes along on that smooth turnpike road that leads
from Coburg to Cold Springs, and from thence to Gore's Landing, may notice
a green waste by the road-side on either hand, and fancy that thereabouts
our Canadian Crusoes' home once stood--he sees the lofty wood-crowned
hill, and sees in spring-time, for in summer it is hidden by the luxuriant
foliage, the little forest creek, and he may if thirsty, taste of the pure
fresh icy water, as it still wells out from a spring in the steep bank,
rippling through the little cedar-trough that Louis Perron placed there
for the better speed of his mother when filling her water jug. All else is
gone. And what wrought the change?--a few words will suffice to tell. Some
travelling fur merchants brought the news to Donald Maxwell, that a party
of Highlanders had made a settlement above Montreal, and among them were
some of his kindred. The old soldier resolved to join them, and it was not
hard to prevail upon his brother-in-law to accompany him, for they were all
now weary of living so far from their fellow-men; and bidding farewell to
the little log-houses at Cold Springs, they now journeyed downwards to the
new settlement, where they were gladly received, their long experience of
the country making their company a most valuable acquisition to the new
colonists.

Not long after the Maxwells took possession of a grant of land, and cleared
and built for themselves and their family. That year Hector, now a fine
industrious young man, presented at the baptismal font as a candidate for
baptism, the Indian girl, and then received at the altar his newly baptized
bride. As to Catharine and Louis, I am not sufficiently skilled in the laws
of their church to tell how the difficulty of nearness of kin was obviated,
but they were married on the same day as Hector and Indiana, and lived a
happy and prosperous life; and often by their fireside would delight their
children by recounting the history of their wanderings on the Rice Lake
Plains.




APPENDIX


APPENDIX A.--_Preface._

Page vii.

Sarah Campbell, of Windsor, who was lost in the woods on the 11th of
August, 1848, returned to her home on the 31st, having been absent
twenty-one days. A friend has sent us a circumstantial account of her
wanderings, of the efforts made in her behalf, and her return home, from
which we condense the following statements:--

It appears that on the 11th of August, in company with two friends, she
went fishing on the north branch of Windsor-brook; and that on attempting
to return she became separated from her companions, who returned to her
mother's, the Widow Campbell, expecting to find her at home. Several of her
neighbours searched for her during the night, without success. The search
was continued during Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, by some fifty or sixty
individuals, and although her tracks, and those of a dog which accompanied
her, were discovered, no tidings of the girl were obtained. A general
sympathy for the afflicted widow and her lost daughter was excited, and
notwithstanding the busy season of the year, great numbers from Windsor and
the neighbouring townships of Brompton, Shipton, Melbourne, Durham, Oxford,
Sherbrooke, Lennoxville, Stoke, and Dudswell, turned out with provisions
and implements for camping in the woods, in search of the girl, which was
kept up without intermission for about fourteen days, when it was generally
given up, under the impression that she must have died, either from
starvation, or the inclemency of the weather, it having rained almost
incessantly for nearly a week of the time. On the 3lst her brother returned
home from Massachusetts, and with two or three others renewed the search,
but returned the second day, and learned to their great joy that the lost
one had found her way home the evening previous.

On hearing of her return, our correspondent made a visit to Widow Campbell,
to hear from her daughter the story of her wanderings. She was found,
as might be supposed, in a very weak and exhausted condition, but quite
rational, as it seems she had been during the whole period of her absence.
From her story the following particulars were gathered:--

When first lost she went directly from home down "Open Brooke," to a
meadow, about a mile distant from where she had left her companions, which
she mistook for what is called the "_Oxias_ opening," a mile distant in
the opposite direction. On Sabbath morning, knowing that she was lost, and
having heard that lost persons might be guided by the sun, she undertook
to follow the sun during the day. In the morning she directed her steps
towards the East, crossed the north Branch, mistaking it for "Open Brooke,"
and travelled, frequently running, in a south-east direction (her way home
was due north) seven or eight miles till she came to the great Hay-meadow
in Windsor. There she spent Sabbath night, and on Monday morning directed
her course to, and thence down, the South Branch in the great Meadow.

After this, she appears to have spent her time, except while she was
searching for food for herself and dog, in walking and running over
the meadow, and up and down the south branch, in search of her home,
occasionally wandering upon the highlands, and far down towards the
junction of the two main streams, never being more than seven or eight
miles from home.

For several days, by attempting to follow the sun, she travelled in a
circle, finding herself at night near the place where she left in the
morning. Although she often came across the tracks of large parties of men,
and their recently-erected camps, and knew that multitudes of people were
in search of her, she saw no living person, and heard no sound of trumpet,
or other noise, except the report of a gun, as she lay by a brook, early on
Thursday morning, the sixth day of her being lost. Thinking the gun to have
been fired not more than half a mile distant, she said she "screamed and
run" to the place from whence she supposed the noise came, but found
nothing. Early in the day, however, she came to the camp where this gun was
fired, but not until after its occupants had left to renew their search for
her. This camp was about four miles from the great meadow, where she spent
the Sabbath previous. There she found a fire, dried her clothes, and found
a partridge's gizzard, which she cooked and ate, and laid down and slept,
remaining about twenty-four hours.

In her travels she came across several other camps, some of which she
visited several times, particularly one where she found names cut upon
trees, and another in which was a piece of white paper. Except three or
four nights spent in these camps, she slept upon the ground, sometimes
making a bed of moss, and endeavouring to shelter herself from the
drenching rains with spruce boughs. For the two first weeks she suffered
much from the cold, shivering all night, and sleeping but little. The last
week she said she had got "toughened," and did not shiver. When first
lost she had a large trout, which was the only food she ate, except
choke-berries, the first week, and part of this she gave to her dog, which
remained with her for a week, day and night. The cherries, which she ate
greedily, swallowing the stones, she found injured her health; and for the
last two weeks she lived upon cranberries and wood sorrel. While the dog
remained with her, she constantly shared her food with him, but said she
was glad when he left her, as it was much trouble to find him food.

On Thursday of last week she followed the south towards the junction with
the north branch, where it appeared she had been before, but could not ford
the stream; and in the afternoon of Friday crossed the north, a little
above its junction with the south branch, and following down the stream,
she found herself in the clearing, near Moor's Mill. Thence directing
her steps towards home, she reached Mr. McDale's, about a mile from her
mother's, at six o'clock, having walked five miles in two hours, and
probably ten miles during the day. Here she remained till the next day,
when she was carried home, and was received by friends almost as one raised
from the dead. Her feet and ankles were very much swollen and lacerated;
but strange to say, her calico gown was kept whole, with the exception of
two small rents.

Respecting her feelings during her fast in the wilderness, she says she
was never frightened, though sometimes, when the sun disappeared, she felt
disheartened, expecting to perish; but when she found, by not discovering
any new tracks, that the people had given over searching for her, she was
greatly discouraged. On the morning of Friday, she was strongly inclined to
give up, and lie down and die; but the hope of seeing her mother stimulated
her to make one more effort to reach home, which proved successful. When
visited, she was in a state of feverish excitement and general derangement
of the system, and greatly emaciated, with a feeble voice, but perfectly
sane and collected.

It is somewhat remarkable that a young girl (aged seventeen), thinly clad,
could have survived twenty-one days, exposed as she was to such severe
storms, with no other food but wild berries. It is also very strange that
she should have been so frequently on the tracks of those in search of her,
sleeping in the camps, and endeavouring to follow their tracks home, and
not have heard any of their numerous trumpets, or been seen by any of the
hundreds of persons who were in search for her.

A more dismal result than the deprivations endured by Sarah Campbell, is
the frightful existence of a human creature, called in the American papers,
the "Wild Man of the far West." From time to time, these details approach
the terrific, of wild men who have grown up from childhood in a state of
destitution in the interminable forests, especially of this one, who, for
nearly a quarter of a century, has occasionally been seen, and then either
forgotten, or supposed to be the mere creation of the beholder's brain. But
it appears that he was, in March, 1850, encountered by Mr. Hamilton, of
Greene County, Arkansas, when hunting. The wild man was, likewise, chasing
his prey. A herd of cattle fled past Mr. Hamilton and his party, in an
agony of terror, pursued by a giant, bearing a dreadful semblance to
humanity. His face and shoulders were enveloped with long streaming hair,
his body was entirely hirsute, his progression was by great jumps of twelve
or thirteen feet at a leap. The creature turned and gazed earnestly on the
hunters, and fled into the depths of the forest, where he was lost to view.
His foot-prints were thirteen inches long. Mr. Hamilton published the
description of the savage man in the _Memphis Inquirer_. Afterwards several
planters deposed to having, at times, for many years, seen this appearance.
All persons generally agreed that it was a child that had been lost in the
woods, at the earthquake in 1811, now grown to meridian strength, in a
solitary state. Thus the possibility of an European child living, even
unassisted, in the wilderness, is familiar to the inhabitants of the
vast American continent. Although we doubt that any human creature would
progress by leaps, instead of the paces familiar to the human instinct. It
is probable that the wild man of the Arkansas is, in reality, some species
of the oran-outang, or chimpanzee.


APPENDIX B.

Page 72.--_"where Wolf Tower now stands."_

The Wolf Tower is among the very few structures in Canada not devoted to
purposes of strict utility. It was built by a gentleman of property as a
_belle vue,_ or fanciful prospect residence, in order to divert his mind
from the heavy pressure of family affliction. It was once lent by him to
the author, who dwelt here some time during the preparation of another
house in the district.


APPENDIX C.

Page 113.--_"... as civilization advances."_

Formerly the Rice Lake Plains abounded in deer, wolves, bears, raccoons,
wolverines, foxes, and wild animals of many kinds. Even a few years ago,
and bears and wolves were not unfrequent in their depredations; and the
ravines sheltered herds of deer; but now the sight of the former is a thing
of rare occurrence, and the deer are scarcely to be seen, so changed is
this lovely wilderness, that green pastures and yellow cornfields now meet
the eye on every side, and the wild beasts retire to the less frequented
depths of the forest.

From the undulating surface, the alternations of high hills, deep valleys,
and level table-lands, with the wide prospect they command, the Rice Lake
Plains still retain their picturesque beauty, which cannot be marred by the
hand of the settler even be he ever so devoid of taste; and many of those
who have chosen it as their home are persons of taste and refinement, who
delight in adding to the beauty of that which Nature had left so fair.

APPENDIX D. Page 157, _note_.

"I will now," says our Indian historian, "narrate a single circumstance
which will convey a correct idea of the sufferings to which Indians were
often exposed. To obtain furs of different kinds for the traders, we had to
travel far into the woods, and remain there the whole winter. Once we left
Rice Lake in the fall, and ascended the river in canoes as far as Belmont
Lake. There were five families about to hunt with my father on his ground.
The winter began to set in, and the river having frozen over, we left the
canoes, the dried venison, the beaver, and some flour and pork; and when we
had gone further north, say about sixty miles from the white settlements,
for the purpose of hunting, the snow fell for five days in succession,
to such a depth, that it was impossible to shoot or trap anything; our
provisions were exhausted, and we had no means of procuring any more. Here
we were, the snow about five feet deep, our wigwam buried, the branches of
the trees falling all about us, and cracking with the weight of the snow.

"Our mother (who seems, by-the-bye, from the record of her son, to have
been a most excellent woman) boiled birch-bark for my sister and myself,
that we might not starve. On the seventh day some of us were so weak they
could not guard themselves, and others could not stand alone. They could
only crawl in and out of the wigwam. We parched beaver skins and old
mocassins for food. On the ninth day none of the men could go abroad except
my father and uncle. On the tenth day, still being without food, the only
ones able to walk about the wigwam were my father, my grandmother, my
sister, and myself. Oh, how distressing to see the starving Indians lying
about the wigwam with hungry and eager looks!--the children would cry for
something to eat! My poor mother would heave bitter sighs, of despair, the
tears falling profusely from her cheeks as she kissed us! Wood, though in
plenty, could not be obtained on account of the feebleness of our limbs. My
father would at times draw near the fire and rehearse some prayer to the
gods. It appeared to him that there was no way of escape; the men, women,
and children, dying; some of them were speechless, the wigwam was cold and
dark, and covered with snow!

"On the eleventh day, just before daylight, my father fell into a sleep; he
soon awoke, and said to me: 'My son, the good Spirit is about to bless us
this night; in my dream I saw a person coming from the east walking on
the tops of the trees; he told me we should obtain two beavers about nine
o'clock. Put on your mocassins, and go along with me to the river, and we
will hunt beaver, perhaps, for the last time.' I saw that his countenance
beamed with delight and hope; he was full of confidence. I put on my
mocassins and carried my snow-shoes, staggering along behind him about half
a mile. Having made a fire near the river, where there was an air-hole
through which the beaver had come up during the night, my father tied a gun
to a stump with the muzzle towards the air-hole; he also tied a string to
the trigger, and said, 'Should you see the beaver rise pull the string, and
you will kill it.' I stood by the fire, with the string in my hand; I soon
heard the noise occasioned by the blow of his tomahawk; he had killed a
beaver and brought it to me. As he laid it down, he said, 'Then the great
Spirit will not let us die here;' adding, as before, 'if you see the beaver
rise, pull the string;' and he left me. I soon saw the nose of one, but I
did not shoot. Presently, another came up; I pulled the trigger, and off
the gun went. I could not see for some moments for the smoke. My father ran
towards me with the two beavers, and laid them side by side; then, pointing
to the sun,--'Do you see the sun?' he said; 'the great Spirit informed me
that we should kill these two about this time in the morning. We will yet
see our relatives at Rice Lake. Now let us go home, and see if our people
are yet alive.' We arrived just in time to save them from death. Since
which we have visited the same spot the year the missionaries came among
us.

"My father knelt down, with feelings of gratitude, on the very spot where
we had nearly perished. Glory to God! I have heard of many who have
perished in this way far up in the woods."--_Life of George Copway, written
by himself_, p. 44.

APPENDIX E.

Page 184.--"_... on first deciding that it was a canoe._"

The Indians say, that before their fathers had tools of iron and steel
in common use, a war canoe was the labour of three generations. It was
hollowed out by means of fire, cautiously applied, or by stone hatchets;
but so slowly did the work proceed, that years were passed in its
excavation. When completed, it was regarded as a great achievement, and its
launching on the waters of the lake or river was celebrated by feasting
and dancing. The artizans were venerated as great patriots. Possibly the
birch-bark canoe was of older date, as being more easily constructed, and
needing not the assistance of the axe in forming it; but it was too frail
to be used in war, or in long voyages, being liable to injuries.

The black stone wedges, so often found on the borders of our inland waters,
were used by the Indians in skinning the deer and bear. Their arrow-heads
were of white or black flint, rudely chipped into shape, and inserted in
a cleft stick. A larger sort were used for killing deer; and blunt wooden
ones were used by the children, for shooting birds and small game.

APPENDIX F.

Page 195.--_"... the Christian mind revolts with horror."_

There is, according to the native author, George Copway, a strong feeling
in the Indians for conversion and civilization, and a concentration of all
the Christianised tribes, now scattered far and wide along the northern
banks of the lakes and rivers, into one nation, to be called by one name,
and united in one purpose--their general improvement. To this end, one of
the most influential of their chiefs, John Jones, of Dover Sound, offered
to give up to his Indian brethren, free of all cost, a large tract of
unceded land, that they might be gathered together as one nation.

In the council held at Sangeeny, where were convened Indian chiefs from
lakes St. Clare, Samcoe, Huron, Ontario, and Rice, and other lakes, it was
proposed to devise a plan by which the tract owned by the Sangeenys could
be held for the benefit of the Ojebwas, to petition Government for aid in
establishing a manual-labour school, and to ascertain the general feeling
of the chiefs in relation to forming one large settlement at Owen's Sound.
At this meeting forty-eight chiefs were assembled.

There is much to admire in the simple, earnest, and courteous style of the
oration delivered by Chief John Jones, and will give to my readers some
idea of the intelligence of an educated Indian:--

"Brothers, you have been called from all your parts of Canada, even from
the north of Georgian Bay. You are from your homes, your wives, and your
children. We might regret this, were it not for the circumstances that
require you here.

"Fellow-chiefs and brothers, I have pondered with deep solicitude our
present condition and the future welfare of our children, as well as of
ourselves. I have studied deeply and anxiously, in order to arrive at a
true knowledge of the proper course to be pursued to secure to us and our
descendants, and even to those around us, the greatest amount of peace,
health, happiness, and usefulness. The interests of the Ojebwas and Ottawas
are near and dear to my heart; for them I have often passed sleepless
nights, and have suffered from an agitated mind. These nations, I am proud
to say, are my brothers, many of them bone of my bone; and for them, if
needs be, I would willingly sacrifice anything. Brothers, you see my
heart." [Here he held out a piece of white paper, emblematical of a pure
heart.]

"Fellow-chiefs and warriors, I have looked over your wigwams throughout
Canada, and have come to the conclusion that you are in a warm place
[_query_, too hot to hold you]. The whites are kindling fires all round you
[_i.e._ clearing land].

"One purpose for which you have been called together, is to devise some
plan by which we can live together, and become a happy people; so that our
dying fires may not go out, _i.e._ our people become extinct, but may be
kindled, and burn brightly, in one place. We now offer you any portion of
the land we own in this region, that we may smoke the pipe of peace, and
live and die together, and see our children play and be reared on the same
spot. We ask no money of you. We love you; and because we love you, and
feel for you, we propose this.

"My chiefs, brothers, warriors. This morning" [the speaker now pointed with
his finger towards the heavens], "look up and see the blue sky: there are
no clouds; the sun is bright and clear. Our fathers taught us, that when
the sky was without clouds, the Great Spirit was smiling upon them. May he
now preside over us, that we may make a long, smooth, and straight path for
our children. It is true I seldom see you all, but this morning I shake
hands with you all, in my heart.

"Brothers, this is all I have to say."

       *       *       *       *       *

APPENDIX G.

Page 213.--_"... and aimed a knife at his throat"_

The period at which these events are said to have occurred was some sixty
or eighty years ago, according to the imperfect chronology of my informant.
At first, I hesitated to believe that such horrible deeds as those recorded
could have taken place almost within the memory of men. My Indian narrator
replied--"Indians, no Christians in those days, do worse than that very few
years ago,--do as bad now in far-west."

The conversion of the Rice Lake Indians, and the gathering them together
in villages, took place, I think, in the year 1825, or thereabouts. The
conversion was effected by the preaching of missionaries from the Wesleyan
Methodist Church; the village was under the patronage of Captain Anderson,
whose descendants inherit much land on the north shore on and about
Anderson's Point, the renowned site of the great battle. The war-weapon and
bones of the enemies the Ojebwas are still to be found in this vicinity.

       *       *       *       *       *

APPENDIX H.

Page 232.--_"This place she called Spooke Island"_

Spooke Island. A singular and barren island in the Rice Lake, seventh from
the head of the lake, on which the Indians used formerly to bury their
dead, for many years held as a sacred spot, and only approached with
reverence. Now famous for two things, _picnics_ and _poison ivy, rhus
toxicodendron,_--many persons having suffered for their temerity in landing
upon it and making it the scene of their rural festivities.


APPENDIX I.

Page 253.--_"and nothing but fire."_

The Indians call the Rice Lake, in allusion to the rapidity with which
fires run over the dry herbage, the Lake of the Burning Plains. Certainly,
there is much poetical fitness and beauty in many of the Indian names,
approximating very closely to the figurative imagery of the language of the
East; such is "Mad-wa-osh," the music of the winds.


APPENDIX K.

Page 272.--_"but it was not so in the days whereof I have spoken."_

_From George Copway's Life._

Converted Indians are thus described in the "Life" of their literary
countryman, George Copway:--

_Chippewas of the River Credit._--These Indians are the remnant of a tribe
which formerly possessed a considerable portion of the Elome and Gore
Districts, of which, in 1818, they surrendered the greater part for an
annuity of 532_l._ 10_s._ reserving only certain small tracts at the River
Credit; and at sixteen and twelve miles creeks they were the first tribe
converted to Christianity. Previous to the year 1823 they were wandering
pagans. In that year Peter Jones, and John his brother, the sons of a white
by a Mississaga woman, having been converted to Christianity, and admitted
as members of the Wesleyan Methodist Church, became anxious to redeem
their countrymen from their degraded state of heathenism and spiritual
destitution. They collected a considerable number together, and by rote and
frequent repetitions, taught the first principles of Christianity to such
as were too old to learn to read, and with the Lord's Prayer, the Creed,
and Commandments, were thus committed to memory. As soon as the tribes
were converted they perceived the evils attendant on their former state
of ignorance and vagrancy. They began to work, which they had never done
before; they recognised the advantage of cultivating the soil; they gave
up drinking, to which they had been greatly addicted, and became sober,
consistent, industrious Christians.

J. Sawyer, P. Jones, Chiefs; J. Jones, War-chief.

The _Chippewas of Alnwick_ were converted in 1826-7 They were wandering
pagans, in the neighbourhood of Belleville, Kingston, and Gannoyne,
commonly known as Mississagas of the Bay of Quinte; they resided on Grape
Island, in the Bay of Quinte, six miles from Belleville. They resided
eleven years on the island, subsisting by hunting and agriculture. Their
houses were erected partly by their own labour and by the Wesleyan
Missionary funds; these consist of twenty-three houses, a commodious chapel
and school, an infant school, hospital, smithy, shoemaker's shop and
joiner's. There are upwards of 300 of these Indians.

The chiefs are--Sunday; Simpson; G. Corrego, chief and missionary
interpreter.

_Rice Lake Chippewas_.--In 1818 the greater part of the Newcastle and
Colburn districts were surrendered, for an annuity of 940_l_. These Indians
have all been reclaimed from their wandering life, and settled in their
present locations, within the last ten or twelve years. [Footnote: I think
G. Copway is incorrect as to the date of the settling of the village, as it
was pointed out to me in 1832. Note,--In the year 1822 the larger part
of the Indian village on Anderson's Point was built and cultivated.]
The settlement is on the north side of the lake, twelve miles from
Peterborough. Number of Indians, 114; possessing 1,550 acres, subdivided in
50-acre lots.

Chiefs--Pondash, Copway, Crow.

Deer were plenty a few years ago, but now only few can be found. The
Ojebwas are at present employed in farming instead of hunting; many of them
have good and well-cultivated farms; they not only raise grain, enough, for
their own use, but often sell much to the whites.


APPENDIX L.

Page 282.--_"... that an outward manifestation of surprise."_

A young friend, who was familiar with Indian character from frequent
intercourse with them in his hunting expeditions, speaking of their
apparent absence of curiosity, told me that, with a view to test it, he
wound up a musical snuff-box, and placed it on a table in a room where
several Indian hunters and their squaws were standing together, and
narrowly watched their countenances, but they evinced no sort of surprise
by look or gesture, remaining apathetically unmoved. He retired to an
adjoining room, where, unseen, he could notice what passed, and was amused
at perceiving, that the instant they imagined themselves free from his
surveillance, the whole party mustered round the mysterious toy like a
parcel of bees, and appeared to be full of conjecture and amazement, but
they did not choose to be entrapped into showing surprise. This perfect
command over the muscles of the face, and the glance of the eye, is one of
the remarkable traits in the Indian character. The expression of the
Indian face, if I may use so paradoxical a term, consists in a want of
expression--like the stillness of dark deep water, beneath which no object
is visible. APPENDIX M.

Page 332.--_"bracelets of porcupine quills cut in fine pieces and strung in
fanciful patterns."_

The Indian method of drawing out patterns on the birch bark, is simply
scratching the outline with some small-pointed instrument, Canadian thorn,
a bodkin of bone, or a sharp nail. These outlines are then pierced with
parallel rows of holes, into which the ends of the porcupine quills are
inserted, forming a rich sort of embroidery on the surface of the bark.

The Indian artistes have about as much notion of perspective, or the
effects of light and shade, as the Chinese or our own early painters; their
attempts at delineating animals, or birds, are flat, sharp, and angular;
and their groups of flowers and trees not more graceful or natural than
those on a china plate or jar; nevertheless, the effect produced is rich
and striking, from the vivid colours and the variety of dyes they contrive
to give to this simple material, the porcupine quills. The sinew of the
deer, and some other animals, furnish the Indian women with thread, of any
degree of fineness or strength. The wants of these simple folk are few,
and those easily supplied by the adaptation of such materials as they can
command with ease, in their savage state.


APPENDIX N.

Page 339.--_"is Mount Ararat."_

Mount Ararat, the highest elevation on the Rice Lake Plains, for nearly two
years the residence of the Authoress and her family.





End of Project Gutenberg's Canadian Crusoes, by Catherine Parr Traill

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANADIAN CRUSOES ***

This file should be named 7cacr10.txt or 7cacr10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, 7cacr11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 7cacr10a.txt

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Widger,
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

