The Project Gutenberg EBook of We Can't Have Everything, by Rupert Hughes

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: We Can't Have Everything

Author: Rupert Hughes

Release Date: December, 2004 [EBook #7077]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on March 6, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WE CAN'T HAVE EVERYTHING ***




This eBook was produced by Earle Beach, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team






WE CAN'T HAVE EVERYTHING




BOOKS BY RUPERT HUGHES

We Can't Have Everything

In A Little Town

The Thirteenth Commandment

Clipped Wings

What Will People Say?

The Last Rose Of Summer

Empty Pockets




[Illustration: WAR, THE SUNDERER, HAD REACHED THEM WITH HIS GREAT DIVORCE]




WE CAN'T HAVE EVERYTHING

A NOVEL BY RUPERT HUGHES

AUTHOR OF _What Will People Say?_

ILLUSTRATED BY JAMES MONTGOMERY FLAGG




CONTENTS

THE FIRST BOOK
MISS KEDZIE THROPP COMES TO TOWN

THE SECOND BOOK
MRS. TOMMIE GILFOYLE HAS HER PICTURE TAKEN

THE THIRD BOOK
MRS. JIM DYCKMAN IS NOT SATISFIED

THE FOURTH BOOK
THE MARCHIONESS HAS QUALMS




THE FIRST BOOK

MISS KEDZIE THROPP COMES TO TOWN




CHAPTER I

Kedzie Thropp had never seen Fifth Avenue or a yacht or a butler
or a glass of champagne or an ocean or a person of social prominence.
She wanted to see them.

For each five minutes of the day and night, one girl comes to New
York to make her life; or so the compilers of statistics claim.

This was Kedzie Thropp's five minutes.

She did not know it, and the two highly important, because extremely
wealthy, beings in the same Pullman car never suspected her--never
imagined that the tangle they were already in would be further
knotted, then snipped, then snarled up again, by this little
mediocrity.

We never can know these things, but go blindly groping through
the crowd of fellow-gropers, guessing at our presents and getting
our pasts all wrong. What could we know of our futures?

Jim Dyckman, infamously rich (through no fault of his own), could not
see far enough past Charity Coe Cheever that day to make out Kedzie
Thropp, a few seats removed. Charity Coe--most of Mrs. Cheever's
friends still called her by her maiden name--sat with her back turned
to Kedzie; and latterly Charity Coe was not looking over her shoulder
much. She did not see Kedzie at all.

And Kedzie herself, shabby and commonplace, was so ignorant that
if she looked at either Jim or Charity Coe she gave them no heed,
for she had never even heard of them or seen their pictures,
so frequent in the papers.

They were among the whom-not-to-know-argues-one-self-unknowns.
But there were countless other facts that argued Kedzie Thropp
unknown and unknowing. As she was forever saying, she had never
had anything or been anywhere or seen anybody worth having, being,
or seeing.

But Jim Dyckman, everybody said, had always had everything, been
everywhere, known everybody who was anybody. As for Charity Coe,
she had given away more than most people ever have. And she, too,
had traveled and met.

Yet Kedzie Thropp was destined (if there is such a thing as being
destined--at any rate, it fell to her lot) to turn the lives of those
two bigwigs topsy-turvy, and to get her picture into more papers
than both of them put together. A large part of latter-day existence
has consisted of the fear or the favor of getting pictures in the
papers.

It was Kedzie's unusual distinction to win into the headlines at
her first entrance into New York, and for the quaintest of reasons.
She had somebody's else picture published for her that time; but
later she had her very own published by the thousand until the
little commoner, born in the most neglected corner of oblivion,
grew impudent enough to weary of her fame and prate of the comforts
of obscurity!

Kedzie Thropp was as plebeian as a ripe peach swung in the sun across
an old fence, almost and not quite within the grasp of any passer-by.
She also inspired appetite, but always somehow escaped plucking
and possession. It is doubtful whether anybody ever really tasted
her soul--if she had one. Her flavor was that very inaccessibility.
She was always just a little beyond. Her heart was forever fixed
on the next thing, just quitting the last thing. Eternal, delicious,
harrowing discontent was Kedzie's whole spirit.

Charity Coe's habit was self-denial; Kedzie's self-fostering,
all-demanding. She was what Napoleon would have been if the Little
Corporal had been a pretty girl with a passion for delicacies
instead of powers.

Thanks to Kedzie, two of the best people that could be were plunged
into miseries that their wealth only aggravated.

Thanks to Kedzie, Jim Dyckman, one of the richest men going and one
of the decentest fellows alive, learned what it means to lie in
shabby domicile and to salt dirty bread with tears; to be afraid
to face the public that had fawned on him, and to understand the
portion of the criminal and the pariah.

And sweet Charity Coe, who had no selfishness in any motive, who
ought to have been canonized as a saint in her smart Parisian robes
of martyrdom, found the clergy slamming their doors in her face
and bawling her name from their pulpits; she was, as it were, lynched
by the Church, thanks again to Kedzie.

But one ought not to hate Kedzie. It was not her fault (was it?)
that she was cooked up out of sugar and spice and everything nice
into a little candy allegory of selfishness with one pink hand
over her little heartless heart-place and one pink hand always
outstretched for more.

Kedzie of the sugar lip and the honey eye! She was going to be carried
through New York from the sub-sub-cellar of its poverty to its highest
tower of wealth. She would sleep one night alone under a public bench
in a park, and another night, with all sorts of nights between, she
would sleep in a bed where a duchess had lain, and in arms Americanly
royal.

So much can the grand jumble of causes and effects that we call fate
do with a wanderer through life.

During the same five minutes which were Kedzie's other girls were
making for New York; some of them to succeed apparently, some of them
to fail undeniably, some of them to become fine, clean wives; some
of them to flare, then blacken against the sky because of famous
scandals and fascinating crimes in which they were to be involved.

Their motives were as various as their fates, and only one thing
is safe to say--that their motives and their fates had little to do
with one another. Few of the girls, if any, got what they came for
and strove for; and if they got it, it was not just what they thought
it was going to be.

This is Kedzie's history, and the history of the problem confronting
Jim Dyckman and Charity Coe Cheever: the problem that Kedzie was going
to seem to solve--as one solves any problem humanly, which is by
substituting one or more new problems in place of the old.

This girl Kedzie who had never had anything had one thing--a fetching
pout. Perhaps she had the pout because she had never had anything.
An Elizabethan poet would have said of her upper lip that a bee
in search of honey had stung it in anger at finding it not the rose
it seemed, but something fairer.

She had eyes full of appeal--appeal for something--what? Who knows?
She didn't. Her eyes said, "Have mercy on me; be kind to me."
The shoddy beaux in her home town said that Kedzie's eyes said,
"Kiss me quick!" They had obeyed her eyes, and yet the look of appeal
was not quenched. She came to New York with no plan to stay. But she
did stay, and she left her footprints in many lives, most deeply
in the life of Jim Dyckman.




CHAPTER II

Miss Kedzie Thropp had never seen Fifth Avenue or a yacht or a butler
or a glass of champagne or an ocean or a person of social prominence.
She wanted to see them. To Jim Dyckman these things were commonplace.
What he wanted was simple, complex, cheap, priceless things--love,
home, repose, contentment.

He was on the top of the world, and he wanted to get down or have
somebody else come up to him. Peaks are by definition and necessity
limited to small foothold. Climbing up is hardly more dangerous
than climbing down. Even to bend and lift some one else up alongside
involves a risk of falling or of being pushed overboard.

But at present Jim Dyckman was thinking of the other girl, Charity
Coe Cheever, perched on a peak as cold and high as his own, but far
removed from his reach.

Even the double seat in the sleeping-car was too small for Jim. He
sprawled from back to back, slumped and hunched in curves and angles
that should have looked peasant and yet somehow had the opposite
effect.

His shoes were thick-soled but unquestionably expensive, his clothes
of loose, rough stuff manifestly fashionable. Like them, he had a
kind of burly grace. He had been used to a well-upholstered life.

He was one of those giants that often grow in rich men's homes. His
father was such another, and his mother suggested the Statue of
Liberty in corsets and on high heels.

Dyckman was reading a weekly journal devoted to horses and dogs,
and reading with such interest that he hardly knew when the train
stopped.

He did not see the woman who got out of a motor and got into the
train, and whose small baggage the porter put in the empty place
opposite his. He did not see that she leaned into the aisle and
regarded him with a pathetic amusement in her caressing eyes. She
took her time about making herself known; then she uttered only
a discreet:

"Ahem!"

She put into the cough many subtle implications. Hardly more could
be crowded into a shrug.

Dyckman came out of his kennels and paddocks, blinked, stared, gaped.
Then he began to stand up by first stepping down. He bestrode the
narrow aisle like a Colossus.

He caught her two hands, brought them together, placed them in one
of his, and covered them with the other as in a big muff, and bent
close to pour into her eyes such ardor that for a moment she closed
hers against the flame.

Then, as if in that silent greeting their souls had made a too loud
and startling noise of welcome, both of them looked about with
an effect of surreptition and alarm.

There were not many people in the car, and they were absorbed in
their own books, gossips, or naps. Only a few head-tops showing
above the high-backed seats, and no eyes or ears.

"Do you know anybody on the train?" the woman asked.

The man shook his head and sank into the seat opposite her, still
clinging to her hands. She extricated them:

"But everybody knows you."

He dismissed this with a sniff of reproof. Then they settled down
in the small trench and seemed to take a childish delight in the
peril of their rencounter.

"Lord, but it's good to see you!" he sighed, luxuriously. "And
you're stunninger than ever!"

"I'm a sight!" she said.

She was clad even more plainly than he, and had the same spirit
of neglectful elegance. She was big, too, for a woman; somewhat lank
but well muscled, and decisive in her motions as if she normally
abounded in strength. What grace she had was an athlete's, but she
looked overtrained or undernourished. Seeing that she did not look
well, Dyckman said:

"How well you're looking, Charity."

She did not look like Charity, either; but her name had been given
to her before she was born. There had nearly always been a girl
called Charity in the Coe family. They had brought the name with
them from New England when they settled in Westchester County some
two hundred years before. They had kept little of their Puritanism
except a few of the names.

This sportswoman called Charity had been trying to live up to her
name, of late. That was why she was haggard. She smiled at her
friend's unmerited praise.

"Thanks, Jim. I need a compliment like the devil."

"Where've you been since you got back?"

"Up in the camp, trying to get a little rest and exercise. But it's
too lonesome nights. I rest better when I keep on the jump."

"You're in black; that doesn't mean--?"

She shook her head. A light of eagerness in his eyes was quenched,
and he growled:

"Too bad!" He could afford to say it, since the object of his obloquy
was alive. If the person mentioned had not been alive, the phrase
he used would have been the same more gently intoned.

Charity protested: "Shame on you! I know you mean it for flattery,
but you mustn't, you really mustn't. I'm in black for--for Europe."
She laughed pitifully at the conceit.

He answered, with admiring awe: "I've heard about you. You're a
wonder; that's what you are, Charity Coe, a wonder. Here's a big
hulk like me loafing around trying to kill time, and a little tike
like you over there in France spending a fortune of money and more
strength than even you've got in a slaughter-house of a war hospital.
How did you stand it?"

"It wasn't much fun," she sighed, "but the nurses can't feel sorry
for themselves when they see--what they see."

"I can imagine," he said.

But he could not have imagined her as she daily had been. She and
the other princesses of blood royal or bourgeois had been moiling
among the red human debris of war, the living garbage of battle,
as the wagons and trains emptied it into the receiving stations.

She and they had stood till they slept standing. They had done
harder, filthier jobs than the women who worked in machine-shops and
in furrows, while the male-kind fought. She had gone about bedabbled
in blood, her hair drenched with it. Her delicate hands had performed
tasks that would have been obscene if they had not been sublime
in a realm of suffering where nothing was obscene except the cause
of it all.

She sickened at it more in retrospect than in action, and tried
to shake it from her mind by a change of subject.

"And what have you been up to, Jim?"

"Ah, nothing but the same old useless loafing. Been up in the North
Woods for some hunting and fishing," he snarled. His voice always
grew contemptuous when he spoke of himself, but idolatrous when
he spoke of her--as now when he asked: "I heard you had gone back
abroad. But you're not going, are you?"

"Yes, as soon as I get my nerves a little steadier."

"I won't let you go back!" He checked himself. He had no right to
dictate to her. He amended to: "You mustn't. It's dangerous crossing,
with all those submarines and floating mines. You've done your bit
and more."

"But there's so horribly much to do."

"You've done enough. How many children have you got now?"

"About a hundred."

"Holy mother!" he whispered, with a profane piety. "Can even you
afford as big a family as that?"

"Well, I've had to call for some help."

"Let me chip in? Will you?"

"Sure I will. Go as far as you like."

"All right; it's a bet. Name the sum, and I'll mail it to you."

"You'd better not mail me anything, Jim" she said.

He blenched and mumbled: "Oh, all right! I'll write you a check now."

"Later," she said. "I don't like to talk much about such things,
please."

"Promise me you won't go back."

She simply waived the theme: "Let's talk of something pleasant,
if you don't mind."

"Something pleasant, eh? Then I can't ask about--him, I suppose."

"Of course. Why not?"

"How is the hound?--begging the pardon of all honest hounds."

She was too sure of her own feelings toward her husband to feel it
necessary to rush to his defense--against a former rival. Her answer
was, "He's well enough to raise a handsome row if he saw you and me
together."

He grumbled a full double-barreled oath and did not apologize for it.
She spoke coldly:

"You'd better go back to your seat."

She was as severe as a woman can well be with a man who adores her
and writhes with jealousy of a man she adores.

"I'll be good, Teacher," he said. "Was he over there with you?"

She evidently liked to talk about her husband. She brightened as
she spoke. "Yes, for a while. He drove a motor-ambulance, you know,
but it bored him after a month or two. They wouldn't let him up to
the firing-lines, so he quit. Have you seen him?"

"Once or twice."

"He's looking well, isn't he?"

"Yes, confound him! His handsome features have been my ruin."

She could smile at that inverted compliment. But Dyckman began
to think very hard. He was suddenly confronted with one of
the conundrums in duty which life incessantly propounds--life that
squats at all the crossroads with a sphinxic riddle for every
wayfarer.




CHAPTER III

Kedzie--to say it again--did not know enough about New York or
the world to recognize Mrs. Cheever and Mr. Dyckman when she glanced
at them and glanced away. They did not at all come up to Kedzie's
idea or ideal of what swells should be, and she had not even grown
up enough to study the society news that makes such thrilling reading
to those who thrill to that sort of thing. The society notes in
the town paper in Kedzie's town (Nimrim, Missouri) consisted of
bombastic chronicles of church sociables or lists of those present
at surprise-parties.

This girl's home was one of the cheapest in that cheap town. Her
people not only were poor, but lived more poorly than they had to.
They had, in consequence, a little reserve of funds, which they
took pride in keeping up. The three Thropps came now to New York
for the first time in their three lives. They were almost as ignorant
as the other peasant immigrants that steam in from the sea.

Adna Thropp, the father, was a local claim-agent on a small railroad.
He spent his life pitting his wits against the petty greed of honest
farmers and God-fearing, railroad-hating citizens. If a granger let
his fence fall down and a rickety cow disputed the right of way with
a locomotive's cow-catcher, the granger naturally put in a claim for
the destruction of a prize-winning animal with a record as an amazing
milker; also he added something for damage to the feelings of the
family in the loss of a household pet. It was Adna's business to beat
the shyster lawyers to the granger and beat the granger to the last
penny. One of his best baits was a roll of cash tantalizingly waved
in front of his victim while he breathed proverbs about the delayful
courts.

This being Adna's livelihood, it was not surprising that his habit
of mind gave pennies a grave importance. Of course, he carried his
mind home with him from the office, and every demand of his wife
or children for money was again a test of ability in claim-agency
tactics. He fought so earnestly for every cent he gave down that his
dependents felt that it was generally better to go without things
than to enter into a life-and-death struggle for them with Pa.

For that reason Ma Thropp did the cooking, baked the "light bread,"
and made the clothes and washed them and mended them till they
vanished. She cut the boys' hair; she schooled the girls to help her
in the kitchen and at the sewing-machine and with the preserve-jars.
Her day's work ended when she could no longer see her darning-needle.
It began as soon as she could see daylight to light the fire by. In
winter the day began in her dark, cold kitchen long before the sun
started his fire on the eastern hills.

She upheld a standard of morals as high as Mount Everest and as bleak.
She made home a region of everlasting chores, rebukes, sayings wiser
than tender, complaints and bitter criticisms of husband, children,
merchants, neighbors, weather, prices, fabrics--of everything on
earth but of nothing in heaven.

Strange to say, the children did not appreciate the advantages
of their life. The boys had begun to earn their own money early by
the splitting of wood and the shoveling of snow, by the vending of
soap, and the conduct of delivery-wagons. They spent their evenings
at pool-tables or on corners. The elder girls had accepted positions
in the various emporia of the village as soon as they could. They
counted the long hours of the shop life as an escape from worse.
Their free evenings were not devoted to self-improvement. They
did not turn out to be really very good girls. They were up to all
sorts of village mischief and shabby frivolity. Their poor mother
could not account for it. She could scold them well, but she could
not scold them good.

The daughter on the train, the youngest--named Kedzie after an aunt
who was the least poor of the relatives--was just growing up into
a similar career. Her highest prayer was that her path might lead
her to a clerkship in a candy-shop. Then this miracle! Her father
announced that he was going to New York.

Adna was always traveling on the railroad, but he had never traveled
far. To undertake New York was hardly less remarkable than to run
over to the moon for a few days.

When he brought the news home he could hardly get up the front steps
with it. When he announced it at the table, and tried to be careless,
his hand trembled till the saucerful of coffee at his quivering lips
splashed over on the clean red-plaid table-cloth.

The occasion of Thropp's call to New York was this: he had joined
a "benevolent order" of the Knights of Something-or-other in his
early years and had risen high in the chapter in his home town.
When one of the members died, the others attended his funeral in
full regalia, consisting of each individual's Sunday clothes,
enhanced with a fringed sash and lappets. Also there was a sword
to carry. The advantage of belonging to the order was that the
member got the funeral for nothing and his wife got the further
consolation of a sum of money.

Mrs. Thropp bore her neighbors no more ill-will than they deserved,
but she did enjoy their funerals. They gave her husband an excuse
for his venerable silk hat and his gilded glave. Sometimes as she
took her hands out of the dough and dried them on her apron to fasten
his sash about him, she felt all the glory of a medieval countess
buckling the armor on her doughty earl. She had never heard of such
persons, but she knew their epic uplift.

Now, Mr. Thropp had paid his dues and his insurance premiums
for years and years. They were his one extravagance. Also he had
persuaded Mrs. Thropp's brother Sol to do the same. Sol had died
recently and left his insurance money to Mrs. Thropp. Sol's own wife,
after cherishing long-deferred hopes of spending that money herself,
had been hauled away first. She never got that insurance money.
Neither did any one else; the central office in New York failed
to pay up.

The annual convention was about to be held in the metropolis, and
there was to be a tremendous investigation of the insurance scandal.
Adna was elected the delegate of the Nimrim chapter, for he was known
to be a demon in a money-fight.

And this was the glittering news that Adna brought home. Small wonder
it spilled his coffee. And that wife of his not only had to go and
yell at him about a little coffee-stain, but she had to announce that
she hardly saw how she could get ready to go right away--and who was
to look after those children?

Adna's jaw fell. Perhaps he had ventured on dreams of being set free
in New York all by himself. She soon woke him. She said she wouldn't
no more allow him loose in that wicked place than she would--well,
she didn't know what! He could get a pass for self and wife as easy
as shootin'. Adna yielded to the inevitable with a sorry grace and
told her to come along if she'd a mind to.

And then came a still, small voice from daughter Kedzie. She spoke
with a menacing sweetness: "Goody, goody! Besides seeing New York,
I won't have to go to school for--How long we goin' to be gone,
poppa?"

Both parents stared at her aghast and told her to hush her mouth.
It was a very pretty mouth even in anger, and Kedzie declined to
hush it. She said:

"Well, if you two think you're goin' to leave me home, you got
another think comin'--that's all I got to say."

She betrayed an appalling stubbornness, a fiendish determination
to subdue her parents or talk them to death.

"I never get to go any place," she wailed. "I never been anywhere or
seen anything or had anything; I might as well be a bump on a log.
And now you're goin' to New York. I'd sooner go there than to heaven.
It's my first chance to see a city, and I just tell you right here
and now, I'm not goin' to lose it! You take me or you'll be mighty
sorry. I'll--I'll--"

"You'll what?" her father sneered. What, after all, could a young
girl do?

"I'll run off, that's what I'll do! And disgrace you! I'll run away
and you'll never see me again. If you're mean enough to not take me,
I'm mean enough to do something desprut. You'll see!"

Her father realized that there were several things a young girl
could do to punish her parents. Kedzie frightened hers with her
fanatic zeal. They gave in at last from sheer terror. Immediately
she became almost intolerably rapturous. She shrieked and jumped;
and she kissed and hugged every member of the household, including
the dogs and the cats. She must go down-town and torment her girl
friends with her superiority and she could hardly live through
the hours that intervened before the train started.

The Thropps rode all day in the day-coach to Chicago, and Kedzie
loved every cinder that flew into her gorgeous eyes. Now and then
she slept curled up kittenwise on a seat, and the motion of the train
lulled her as with angelic pinions. She dreamed impossible glories
in unheard-of cities.

But her mother bulked large and had been too long accustomed to
her own rocking-chair to rest in a day-coach. She reached Chicago
in a state of collapse. She told Adna that she would have to travel
the rest of the way in a sleeper or in a baggage-car, for she just
naturally had to lay down. So Adna paid for two berths. It weakened
him like a hemorrhage.

Kedzie's first sorrow was in leaving Chicago. They changed trains
there, bouncing across the town in a bus. That transit colored
Kedzie's soul like dragging a ribbon through a vat of dye. Henceforth
she was of a city hue.

She was enamoured of every cobblestone, and she loved every man,
woman, horse, and motor she passed. She tried to flirt with
the tall buildings. She was afraid to leave Chicago lest she never
get to New York, or find it inferior. She begged to be left there.
It was plenty good enough for her.

But once aboard the sleeping-car she was blissful again, and
embarrassed her mother and father with her adoration. In all
sincerity, Kedzie mechanically worshiped people who got things
for her, and loathed people who forbade things or took them away.

She horrified the porter by calling him "Mister"--almost as much
as her parents scandalized him the next day by eating their meals
out of a filing-cabinet of shoe-boxes compiled by Mrs. Thropp. But
it was all picnic to Kedzie. Fortunately for her repose, she never
knew that there was a dining-car attached.

The ordeal of a night in a sleeping-car coffin was to Kedzie an
experience of faery. She laughed aloud when she bumped her head,
and getting out of and into her clothes was a fascinating exercise
in contortion. She was entranced by the wash-room with its hot and
cold water and its basin of apparent silver, whose contents did not
have to be lifted and splashed into a slop-jar, but magically
emptied themselves at the raising of a medallion.

She had not worn herself out with enthusiasm by the time the first
night was spent and half the next day. She pressed her nose against
the window and ached with regret at the hurry with which towns and
cities were whipped away from her eyes.

She did not care for grass and trees and cows and dull villages,
but she thrilled at the beauty of big, dark railroad stations
and noble street-cars and avenues paved with exquisite asphalt.

The train was late in arriving at New York, and it was nearer ten
than eight when it roared across the Harlem River. Kedzie was glad of
the display, for she saw the town first as one great light-spangled
banner.

The car seemed to be drawn right through people's rooms. Everybody
lived up-stairs. She caught glimpses of kitchens on the fourth floor
and she thought this adorable, except that it would be a job carrying
the wood all the way up.

The streets went by like the glistening spokes of a swift wheel.
They were packed with interesting sights. No wonder most of the
inhabitants were either in the streets or leaning out of the windows
looking down. Here it was ten o'clock, and not a sign of anybody's
having thought of going to bed. New York was a sensible place.
She liked New York.

But the train seemed to quicken its pace out of mere spitefulness
just as they reached wonderful market streets with flaring lights
over little carts all filled with things to buy.

When the wonder world was blotted from view by the tunnel it
frightened her at first with its long, dark noise and the flip-flops
of light. Then a brief glimpse of towers and walls. Then the dark
station. And they were There!




CHAPTER IV

Jim Dyckman had always loved Charity Coe, but he let another man
marry her--a handsomer, livelier, more entertaining man with whom
Dyckman was afraid to compete. A mingling of laziness and of modesty
disarmed him.

As soon as he saw how tempestuously Peter Cheever began his courtship,
Dyckman withdrew from Miss Coe's entourage. When she asked him why,
he said, frankly:

"Pete Cheever's got me beat. I know when I'm licked."

Pete's courtship was what the politicians call a whirlwind campaign.
Charity was Mrs. Cheever before she knew it. Her friends continued
to call her Charity Coe, but she was very much married.

Cheever was a man of shifting ardors. His soul was filled with
automatic fire-extinguishers. He flared up quickly, but when his
temperature reached a certain degree, sprinklers of cold water
opened in his ceiling and doused the blaze, leaving him unharmed
and hardly scorched. It had been so with his loves.

After a brief and blissful honeymoon, Peter Cheever's capricious
soul kindled at the thought of an exploration of war-filled Europe.
His blushing bride was a hurdle-rider, too, and loved a risk-neck
venture. She insisted on going with him.

He accepted the steering-wheel of a motor-ambulance and left his
bride to her own devices while he shot along the poplar-plumed roads
of France at lightning speed.

Charity drifted into hospital service. Her first soldier, the
tortured victim of a gas-attack, was bewailing the fate of his
motherless child. Charity brought a smile to what lips he had by
whispering:

"I am rich. I will adopt your little girl."

It was the first time she had ever boasted of being rich. The man
died, whispering: "_Merci, Madame! Merci, Madame!_" Another
father was writhing in the premature hell of leaving a shy little
unprotected boy to starve. Charity promised to care for him, too.

At a committee meeting, a week later, she learned of a horde of
war orphans and divided them up with Muriel Schuyler, Mrs. Perry
Merithew, and other American angels abroad.

When Charity's husband wearied of being what he called "chauffeur to
a butcher-wagon," he decided that America was a pretty good country,
after all. But Charity could not tear herself away from her privilege
of suffering, even to follow her bridegroom home. He had cooled to
her also, and he made no protest. He promised to come back for her.
He did not come. He cabled often and devotedly, telling her how
lonely he was and how busy. She answered that she hoped he was
lonely, but she knew he was busy. He would be!

When Cheever first returned, Jim Dyckman saw him at a club. He saw
him afterward in a restaurant with one of those astonishing animals
which the moving pictures have hardly caricatured as a "vampire."
This one would have been impossible if she had not been visible.
She was intensely visible.

Jim Dyckman felt that her mere presence in a public restaurant was
offensive. To think of her as displacing Charity Coe in Cheever's
attentions was maddening. He understood for the first time why
people of a sort write anonymous letters. He could not stoop to
that degradation, and yet he wondered if, after all, it would be
as degrading to play the informer as to be an unprotesting and
therefore accessory spectator and confidant.

Gossip began to deal in the name of Cheever. One day at a club
the he-old-maid "Prissy" Atterbury cackled:

"I saw Pete Cheever at a cabaret--"

Jim asked, anxiously, "Was he alone?"

"Nearly."

"What do you mean--nearly alone?"

"Well, what he had with him is my idea of next to nothing. I wonder
what sinking ship Cheever rescued her from. They tell me she was
a cabaret dancer named Zada L'Etoile--that's French for Sadie Starr,
I suppose."

Dyckman's obsession escaped him.

"Somebody ought to write his wife about it."

"That would be nice!" cried Prissy. "Oh, very, very nice! It would be
better to notify the Board of Health. But it would be still better if
his wife would come home and mind her own business. These Americans
who hang about the edges of the war, fishing for sensations, make me
very tired--oh, very, very tired."

Prissy never knew how near he was to annihilation. Jim had to hold
one fist with the other. He was afraid to yield to his impulse to
smash Prissy in the droop of his mustache. Prissy was too frail to
be slugged. That was his chief protection in his gossip-mongering
career.

Besides, it is a questionable courtesy for a former beau to defend
another man's wife's name, and Dyckman proved his devotion to Charity
best by leaving her slanderer unrebuked.

It was no anonymous better that brought Charity Coe home. It was
the breakdown of her powers of resistance. Even the soldiers had to
be granted vacations from the trenches; and so an eminent American
surgeon in charge of the hospital she adorned finally drove Mrs.
Cheever back to America. He disguised his solicitude with brutality;
he told her he did not want her to die on their hands.

When Charity came back, Cheever met her and celebrated her return.
She was a new sensation to him again for a week or two, but her need
of seclusion and quiet drove him frantic and he grew busy once more.
He recalled Miss L'Etoile from the hardships of dancing for her
supper. Unlike Charity, Zada never failed to be exciting. Cheever
was never sure what she would do or say or throw next. She was
delicious.

When Dyckman learned of Cheever's extra establishment it enraged him.
He had let Cheever push him aside and carry off Charity Coe, and now
he must watch Cheever push Charity Coe aside and carry on the next
choice of his whims.

To Dyckman, Charity was perfection. To lose her and find her in
the ash-barrel with Cheever's other discarded dolls was intolerable.
Yet what could Dyckman do about it? He dared not even meet Charity.
He hated her husband, and he knew that her husband hated him. Cheever
somehow realized the dogged fidelity of Dyckman's love for Charity
and resented it--feared it as a menace, perhaps.

Dyckman had two or three narrow escapes from running into Charity,
and he finally took to his heels. He lingered in the Canadian wilds
till he thought it safe to return. And now she chanced to board the
same train. The problem he had run away from had cornered him.

He had cherished a sneaking hope that she would learn the truth
somehow before he met her. He was not sure what she ought to do
when she learned it. He was sure that what she would do would be
the one right thing.

Yet he realized from her placid manner of parrying his threats at
her husband that she still loved the wretch and trusted him. It was
up to Jim to tell her what he knew about Cheever. He felt that he
ought to. Yet how could he?

It was hideous that she should sit there smiling tolerantly at
a critic of her infernal husband as serenely as a priestess who
is patient with an unenlightened skeptic.

It was atrocious that Cheever should be permitted to prosper with
this scandal unrebuked, unpunished, actually unsnubbed, accepting
the worship of an angel like Charity Coe and repaying it with black
treachery! To keep silent was to co-operate in the evil--to pander
to it. Dyckman thought it was hideous. The word he thought was
"rotten"!

He actually opened his mouth to break the news. His voice mutinied.
He could not say a word.

Something throttled him. It was that strange instinct which makes
criminals of every degree feel that no crime is so low but that
tattling on it is a degree lower.

Dyckman tried to assuage his self-contempt by the excuse that Charity
was not in the mood or in the place where such a disclosure should
be made. Some day he would tell her and then ask permission to kill
the blackguard for her.

The train had scuttered across many a mile while he meditated the
answer to the latest riddle. His thoughts were so turbulent that
Charity finally intruded.

"What's on your mind, Jim?"

"Oh, I was just thinking."

"What about?"

"Oh, things."

Suddenly he reached out and seized the hand that drooped at her knee
like a wilted lily. He wrung her fingers with a vigor that hurt her,
then he said, "Got any dogs to show this season?"

She laughed at the violent abruptness of this, and said, "I think
I'll give an orphan-show instead."

He shook his head in despairing admiration and leaned back to watch
the landscape at the window. So did she. On the windows their own
reflections were cast in transparent films of light. Each wraith
watched the other, seeming to read the mood and need no speech.

Dyckman's mind kept shuttling over and over the same rails of
thought, like a switch-engine eternally shunting cars from one track
to another. His very temples throbbed with the _clickety-click_
of the train. At last he groaned:

"This world's too much for me. It's got me guessing."

He seemed to be so impressed with his original and profound discovery
of life's unanswerable complexity that Charity smiled, the same sad,
sweet smile with which she pored on the book of sorrow or listened to
the questions of her orphans who asked where their fathers had gone.

She thought of Jim Dyckman as one of her orphans. There was a good
deal of the mother in her love of him. For she did love him. And she
would have married him if he had asked her earlier--before Peter
Cheever swept over her horizon and carried her away with his zest
and his magnificence.

She rebuked herself for thinking of Jim Dyckman as an orphan. He had
a father and mother who doted on him. He had wealth of his own and
millions to come. He had health and brawn enough for two. What right
had he to anybody's pity? Yet she pitied him.

And he pitied her.

And on this same train, in this same car, unnoticed and unnoticing,
sat Kedzie.

Jim and Charity grew increasingly embarrassed as the train drew into
New York. Charity was uncertain whether her husband would meet her
or not. Jim did not want to leave her to get home alone. She did not
want her husband to find her with Jim.

Cheever had excuse enough in his own life for suspecting other
people. He had always disliked Jim Dyckman because Dyckman had
always disliked him, and Jim's transparent face had announced the
fact with all the clarity of an illuminated signboard.

Also Charity had loved Jim before she met Cheever, and she made no
secret of being fond of him still. In their occasional quarrels,
Cheever had taunted her with wishing she had married Jim, and she
had retorted that she had indeed made a big mistake in her choice.
Lovers say such things--for lack of other weapons in such combats
as lovers inevitably wage, if only for exercise.

Charity did not really mean what she said, but at times Cheever
thought she did. He had warned her to keep away from Dyckman and
keep Dyckman away from her or there would be trouble. Cheever was
a powerful athlete and a boxer who made minor professionals look
ridiculous. Dyckman was bigger, but not so clever. A battle between
the two stags over the forlorn doe would be a horrible spectacle.
Charity was not the sort of woman that longs for such a conflict
of suitors. Just now she had seen too much of the fruits of male
combat. She was sick of hatred and its devastation.

So Charity begged Dyckman to get off at One Hundred and Twenty-fifth
Street, but he would not show himself so poltroon. He answered, "I'd
like to see myself!" meaning that he would not.

She retorted, "Then I'll get off there myself."

"Then I'll get off there with you," he grumbled.

Charity flounced back into her seat with a gasp of mitigated disgust.
The mitigation was the irresistible thrill of his devotion. She had
a husband who would desert her and a cavalier who would not. It was
difficult not to forgive the cavalier a little.

Yet it would have been better if he had obeyed her command or she
her impulse. Or would it have been? The worst might always have been
worse.




CHAPTER V

When Kedzie was angry she called her father an "old country Jake."
Even she did not know how rural he was or how he had oppressed
the sophisticated travelers in the smoking-room of the sleeping-car
with his cocksure criticisms of cities that he had never seen. He
had condemned New York with all the mercilessness of a small-town
superiority, and he had told funny stories that were as funny as
the moss-bearded cypresses in a lone bayou. While he was denouncing
New York as the home of ignorance and vice, the other men were having
sport with him--sport so cruel that only his own cruelty blinded
him to it.

When the porter summoned the passengers to pass under the whisk broom,
Adna remembered that he had not settled upon his headquarters in
New York, and he said to a man on whom he had inflicted a vile cigar:
"Say, I forgot to ask you. What's a good hotel in New York that ain't
too far from the railroad and don't rob you of your last nickel?
Or is they one?"

One of the smoking-room humorists mocked his accent and ventured
a crude jape.

"You can save the price of a hack-ride by going to Mrs. Biltmore's
new boarding-house. It's right across the road from the depot."

If Adna had been as keen as he thought he was, or if the porter
had not alarmed him just then by his affectionate interest, even
Adna would have noted the grins on the faces of the men.

But he broke the porter's heart by dodging the whisk broom and
hustling his excited family to their feet. They were permitted to
hale their own hand-baggage to the platform, where two red-capped
Kaffirs reached for it together. There was danger of an altercation,
but the bigger of the two frightened the smaller away by snapping
his shiny eyeballs alarmingly. The smaller one took a second look
at Adna and retreated with scorn, snickering:

"You kin have him."

The other, who was a good loser at craps or tips, re-examined his
clients, flickered his eyelids, and started down the platform to
have it over with as soon as possible. He paused to say:

"Where you-all want to go to--a taxicab?"

Adna, who was a little nervous about his property, answered with
some asperity:

"No, we don't need any hack to git to Biltmore's."

"Nossah!" said the red-cap.

"Right across the street, ain't it?"

"Yassah!" The porter chuckled. The mention of the family's destination
had cheered him a little. He might get a tip, after all. You couldn't
always sometimes tell by a man's clothes how he tipped.

While Kedzie stood watching the red-cap bestow the various parcels
under his arms and along his fingers, a man bumped into her and
murmured:

"Sorry!"

She turned and said, "Huh?"

He did not look around. She did not see his face. It was the first
conversation between Jim Dyckman and Kedzie Thropp.

Charity Coe, when the train stopped, had flatly refused to walk up
the station platform with Jim Dyckman. She had not only virtue, but
St. Paul's idea of the importance of avoiding even the appearance
of evil. She would not budge from the car till Jim had gone. He
was forced to leave her at last.

He swung through the crowd in a fury, jostling and begging pardon
and staring over the heads of the pack to see if Cheever were at
the barrier. He jolted Kedzie Thropp among others, apologized,
and thought no more of her.

Cheever had not come to meet his wife. Her telegram was waiting
for him at his official home; he was at his other residence.

When Dyckman saw that no one was there to welcome the fagged-out
Charity, he paused and waited for her himself. When Charity
came along her anxious eyes found nobody she knew except Dyckman.
The disappointment she revealed hurt him profoundly. But he would
not be shaken off again. He turned in at her side and walked along,
and the two porters with their luggage walked side by side.

Prissy Atterbury was hurrying to a train that would take him for a
week-end visitation to people who hated him but needed him to cancel
a female bore with. As Prissy saw it and described it, Dyckman came
into the big waiting-room alone, looked about everywhere, paused,
turned back for Charity Coe; then walked away with her, followed by
their twinned porters. Prissy said "Aha!" behind his big mustaches
and stared till he nearly lost his train.

Atterbury had gained a new topic to carry with him, a topic of such
fertile resources that it went far to pay his board and lodging.
He made a snowball out of the clean reputations of Charity and Jim
and started it downhill, gathering dirt and momentum as it rolled.
It was bound to roll before long into the ken of Peter Cheever,
and he was not the man to tolerate any levity in a wife. Cheever
might be as wicked as Caesar, but his wife must be as Caesar's.

When Charity Coe was garrulous and inordinately gay, Jim Dyckman,
who had known her from childhood, knew that she was trying to rush
across the thin ice over some deep grief.

When he saw how hurt she was at not being met, and he insisted on
taking her home, she chattered and snickered hysterically at his
most stupid remarks. So he said:

"Don't let him break your heart in you, old girl."

She laughed uproariously, almost vulgarly, over that, and answered:
"Me? Let a man break my heart? That's very likely, isn't it?"

"Very!" Jim groaned.

When they reached her magnificent home it had a deserted look.

"Wait here a minute," said Charity when Jim got out to help her out.
She ran up the steps and rang the bell. There was a delay before
the second man in an improvised toilet opened the door to her and
expressed as much surprise as delight at seeing her. "Didn't Mr.
Cheever tell you I was coming home?" she gasped.

"We haven't seen him, ma'am. There's a telegram here for him, but
of course--"

Charity was still in a frantic mood. She wanted to escape brooding,
at all costs. She ran back to where Jim waited at the motor door.

"Got any date to-night, Jim?" she demanded. He shook his head
dolefully, and she said: "Go home, jump into your dancing-shoes,
and come back for me. I'll throw on something light and you can
take me somewhere to dance. I'll go crazy mad, insane, if you
don't. I can't endure this empty house. You don't mind my making
a convenience of you, do you, Jim?"

"I love it, Charity Coe," he groaned. He reached for her hand, but
she was fleeting up the steps. He crept into the car and went to
his home, flung off his traveling-togs, passed through a hot tub
and a cold shower into evening clothes, and hastened away.

Charity kept him waiting hardly a moment. She floated down the stairs
in a something fleetily volatile, and he said:

"You look like a dandelion puff."

"That's right, tell me some nice things," she said. She did not tell
the servant where she was going. She did not know. She hardly cared.




CHAPTER VI

To Kedzie Thropp the waiting-room of the Grand Central Terminal was
the terminus of human splendor. It was the waiting-room to heaven.
And indeed it is a majestic chamber.

The girl walked with her face high, staring at the loftily columned
recesses with the bay-trees set between the huge square pillars,
and above all the feigned blue sky and the monsters of the zodiac
in powdered gold.

Kedzie could hardly breathe--it was so beautiful, so much superior
to the plain every-night sky she was used to, with stars of tin
instead of gold like these.

Even her mother said "Well!" and Adna paid the architects the tribute
of an exclamation: "Humph! So this is the new station we was readin'
about. Some bigger'n ours at home, eh, Kedzie?"

But Kedzie was not there. They had lost her and had to turn back. She
was in a trance. When they snatched her down to earth again and pulled
her through the crowds she began to adore the people. They were
dressed in unbelievable splendor--millions, she guessed, in far better
than the best Sunday best she had ever seen. She wondered if she would
ever have nice clothes. She vowed that she would if she had to murder
somebody to get them.

The porter led the way from the vastitude of a corridor under
the street and through vast empty rooms and up a stairway and down
a few steps and through the first squirrel-cage door Kedzie had ever
seen (she had to run round it thrice before they could get her out)
into a sumptuousness beyond her dream.

At the foot of more stairs the porter let down his burdens, and a boy
in a general's uniform seized them. The porter said, mopping his brow
to emphasize his achievement:

"This is fur's I go."

"Oh, all right! Much obliged," said Adna. He just pretended to walk
away as a joke on the porter. When he saw the man's white stare
aggravated sufficiently, Adna smiled and handed him a dime.

The porter stared and turned away in bitter grief. Then his chuckle
returned as he went his way, telling himself: "And the bes' of it
was, I fit for him! I just had to git that man."

He told the little porter about it, and when the little porter, who
had been scared away from the Thropps and left to carry Charity Coe's
dainty hand-bags, showed the big porter what he had received, still
the big porter laughed. He knew how to live, that big porter.

Kedzie followed the little general up the steps and around to
the desk. Her father realized that his fellow-passenger had been
teasing him when he referred to this place as a boarding-house, but
he was not at all crushed by the magnificence he was encountering.
He felt that he was in for it--so he cocked his toothpick pluckily
and wrote on the loose-leaf register the room clerk handed him:

A. Thropp, wife and daughter, Nimrim, Mo.

The room clerk read the name as if it were that of a potentate whose
incognito he would respect, and murmured:

"About what accommodation would you want, Mr. Thropp?"

"Two rooms--one for the wife and m'self, one for the daughter."

"Yes, sir. And about how much would you want to pay?"

"How do they run?"

"We can give you two nice adjoining rooms for twelve dollars--up."

Mr. Thropp made a hasty calculation. Twelve dollars a week for board
and lodging was not so bad. He nodded.

The room clerk marked down a number and slid a key to the page,
who gathered the family treasures together. Kedzie had more or less
helplessly recognized the page's admiration of her when he first
took the things from the porter. The sense of her beauty had choked
the boy's amusement at her parents.

Later Kedzie caught the glance of the room clerk and saw that she
startled him and cheated him of his smile at Adna. Still later
the elevator-boy gave her one respectful look of approval. Kedzie's
New York stir was already beginning.

The page ushered the Thropps into the elevator, and said,
"Nineteen."

It was the number of the floor, not the room. Adna warned his women
folk that "she" was about to go up, but they were not prepared for
that swift vertical leap toward the clouds. Another floor, and
Mrs. Thropp would have screamed. The altitude affected her.

Then the thing stopped, and the boy led them down a corridor so long
that Adna said, "Looks like we'd be stranded a hundred miles from
nowheres."

The boy turned in at a door at last. He flashed on the lights, set
the bags on a bag-rack, hung up the coats, opened a window, adjusted
the shade, lighted the lights in Kedzie's room, opened her window,
adjusted the shade, and asked if there were anything else.

Adna knew what the little villain meant, but he knew what was
expected, and he said, sternly, "Ice-water."

"Right here, sir," said the boy, and indicated in the bathroom
a special faucet marked "Drinking Water."

This startled even Adna so much that it shook a dime out of him.
The boy sighed and went away. Kedzie surprised his eye as he left.
It plainly found no fault with her.

Here in seclusion Mrs. Thropp dared to exclaim at the wonders of
modern invention. Kedzie was enfranchised and began to jump and
squeal at the almost suffocating majesty. Adna took to himself
the credit for everything.

"Well, momma, here we are in New York at last. Here we are, daughter.
You got your wish."

Kedzie nearly broke his neck with her hug, and called him the best
father that ever was. And she meant it at the moment, for the moment.

Mrs. Thropp was already making herself at home, loosening her
waistband and her corset-laces.

Adna made himself at home, too--that is, he took off his coat and
collar and shoes. But Kedzie could not waste her time on comfort
while there was so much ecstasy to be had.

She went to the window, shoved the sash high, and--discovered
New York. She greeted it with an outcry of wonder. She called to
her mother and father to "Come here and looky!"

Her mother moaned, "I wouldn't come that far to look at
New Jerusalem."

Adna yawned noisily and pulled out his watch. His very eyes yawned
at it, and he said: "'Levum o'clock. Good Lord! Git to bed quick!"

Kedzie was furious at ending the day so abruptly. She wanted to
go out for a walk, and they sent her to her room. She watched at
the window as she peeled off her coarse garments and put her soft
body into a rough nightgown as ill-cut and shapeless as she was
neither. She had been turned by a master's lathe.

She waited till she heard her father's well-known snore seesawing
through the panels. Then she went to the window again to gaze her
fill at the town. She fell in love with it and told it so. She vowed
that she would never leave it. She had not come to a strange city;
she had just reached home.

She leaned far out across the ledge to look down at the tremendously
inferior street. She nearly pitched head foremost and scrambled back,
but with a giggle of bliss at the excitement. She stared at the dark
buildings of various heights before her. There was something
awe-inspiring about them.

Across a space of roofs was the electric sign of an electric company,
partly hidden by buildings. All Kedzie could see of it was the huge
phrase LIGHT--HEAT--POWER. She thought that those three graces would
make an excellent motto.

She could see across and down into the well of the Grand Central
Terminal. On its front was some enormous winged figure facing down
the street. She did not know who it was or what street it was. She
did not know any of the streets by name, but she wanted to. She had
a passionate longing for streets.

Farther south or north, east or west, or whichever way it was,
was a tall building with glowing bulbs looped like the strings
of evergreen she had helped to drape the home church with at
Christmas-time. Here it was Christmas every day--all holidays
in one.

Down in the ravine a little in front of her she could read the sign
ATHENS HOTEL. She had heard of Athens. It was the capital of some
place in her geography. She who had so much of Grecian in her soul
was not quite sure of Athens!

In one of the opposite office buildings people were working late.
The curtains were drawn, but the casements were filled with light,
a honey-colored light. The buildings were like great honeycombs;
the dark windows were like the cells that had no honey in them.
Light and life were honey. Kedzie wondered what folks they were behind
those curtains--who they were, and what were they up to. She bet
it was something interesting. She wished she knew them. She wished
she knew a whole lot of city people. But she didn't know a soul.

It was all too glorious to believe. She was in New York! imparadised
in New York!

"Kedzie! Ked-zee-ee!"

"Yes, momma."

"Are you in bed?"

"Yes, momma." She tried to give her voice a faraway, sleepy sound,
for fear that her mother might open the door to be sure.

She crept into bed. The lights burned her weary eyes. She could not
reach them to put them out.

By the head of her bed was a little toy lamp. A chain hung from it.
She tugged at the chain--pouff! Out went the light. She tugged at
the chain. On went the light. A magical chain, that! It put the light
on and off, both. Kedzie could find no chains to pull the ceiling
lights out with. She let them burn.

Kedzie covered her head and yet could not sleep. She sat up quickly.
Was that music she heard? Somebody was giving a party, maybe.

She got up and out again and ran barefoot to the hall door, opened
it an inch, and peeked through. She saw a man and two ladies swishing
along the hall to the elevator. They were not sleepy at all, and
the ladies were dressed--whew! skirts short and no sleeves whatever.
They really were going to a party.

Kedzie closed the door and drooped back to bed--an awful place to go
when all the rest of the world was just starting out to parties.

She flopped and gasped in her bed like a fish ashore. Then a gorgeous
whim came to her. She would dive into her element. Light and fun were
her element. She came out of bed like a watch-spring leaping from
a case. She tiptoed to the parental door--heard nothing but the rumor
of slumber.

She began to dress. She put on her extra-good dress.

She had brought it along in the big valise in case of an accident
to the every-day dress. When she had squirmed through the ordeal
of hooking it up, she realized that its skirts were too long for
decency. She pinned them up at the hem.

The gown had a village low-neck--that is, it was a trifle V'd at
the throat. Kedzie tried to copy the corsage of the women who passed
in the hall. She withdrew from the sleeves, and gathering the waist
together under her arms, fastened it as best she could. The revelation
was terrifying. All of her chest and shoulders and shoulderblades
were bare.

She dared hardly look at herself. Yet she could not possibly deny
the fearful charm of those contours. She put her clothes on again
and prinked as much as she could. Then she sallied forth, opening
and closing the door with pious care. She went to the elevator, and
the car began to drop. The elevator-boy politely lowered it without
plunge or jolt.

Kedzie followed the sound of the music. The lobbies were thronged
with brilliant crowds flocking from theaters for supper and a dance.
Kedzie made her way to the edge of the supper-room. The floor, like
a pool surrounded by chairs and tables, was alive with couples dancing
contentedly. Every woman was in evening dress and so was every man.
The splendor of the costumes made her blink. The shabbiness of her
own made her blush.

She blushed because her own dress was indecent and immoral. It was
indecent and immoral because it was unlike that of the majority.
In this parish, conventionality, which is the one true synonym for
morality, called for bare shoulders and arms unsleeved. Kedzie was
conspicuous, which is a perfect synonym for immoral. If she had
fallen through the ceiling out of a bathtub she could not have felt
more in need of a hiding-place. She shrank into a corner and sought
cover and concealment, for she was afraid to go back to the elevator
through the ceaseless inflow of the decolletees.

She throbbed to the music of the big band; her feet burned to dance;
her waist ached for the sash of a manly arm. She knew that she could
dance better than some of those stodgy old men and block-bodied old
women. But she had no clothes on--for dancing.

But there was one woman whom Kedzie felt she could not surpass,
a dazzling woman with a recklessly graceful young man. The young man
took the woman from a table almost over Kedzie's head. They left at
the table a man in evening dress who smoked a big cigar and seemed
not to be jealous of the two dancers.

Some one among the spectators about Kedzie said that the woman was
Zada L'Etoile, and her partner was Haviland Devoe. Zada was amazing
in her postures and gyrations, but Kedzie thought that she herself
could have danced as well if she had had that music, that costume,
that partner, and a little practice.

When Zada had completed her calisthenics she did not sit down with
Mr. Devoe, but went back to the table where the lone smoker sat. Now
that she looked at him again, Kedzie thought what an extraordinarily
handsome, gloriously wicked-looking, swell-looking man he was. Yet
the girl who had danced called him Peterkin--which didn't sound
very swell to Kedzie.

He had very little to say to Zada, who did most of the talking.
He smiled at her now and then behind his cigar and gave her a queer
look that Kedzie only vaguely understood. She thought little of him,
though, because the next dance began, and she had a whole riot
of costumes to study.

There was a constant movement of new-comers past Kedzie's nook.
Sometimes people halted to look the crowd over before they went
up the steps, and asked two handsome gentlemen in full-dress suits
if they could have a table. The gentlemen--managers, probably, who
got up the party--usually said no. Sometimes they looked at papers
in their hands and marked off something, and then the people got
a table.

By and by two men and an elderly woman dressed like a very youngerly
woman paused near Kedzie. Both of the men were tall, but the one
called Jim was so tall he could see over the rail, or over the moon,
for all Kedzie knew.

The elderly lady said, "Come along, boys; we're missing a love of
a trot."

The less tall of the men said: "Now, mother, restrain yourself.
Remember I've had a hard day and I'm only a young feller. How
about you, Jim?"

"I'll eat something, but I'm not dancing, if you'll pardon me,
Mrs. Duane," said Jim. "And I'm waiting for Charity Coe. She's
in the cloak-room."

"Oh, come along," said Mrs. Duane. "I've got a table and I don't
want to lose it."

She started away, and her son started to follow, but paused as
the other man caught his sleeve and growled:

"I say, isn't that Pete Cheever--there, right there by the rail?
Yes, it is--and with--!"

Then Tom gave a start and said: "Ssh! Here's Charity Coe."

Both men looked confused; then they brightened and greeted a new
batch of drifters, and there was a babble of:

"Why, hello! How are you, Tom! How goes it, Jim? What's the good
word, Mary? What you doing here, Charity, and all in black? Oh,
I have to get out or go mad."

Kedzie, eavesdropping on the chatter, wondered at the commonplace
names and the small-town conversation. With such costumes she
must have expected at least blank verse.

She was interested to see what the stern sentinels would do to
this knot of Toms, Jims, and Marys. She peeked around the corner,
and to her surprise saw them greeted with great cordiality. They
smiled and chatted with the sentinels and were passed through
the silken barrier.

Other people paused and passed in or were rejected. Kedzie watched
Mr. Cheever with new interest, but not much understanding. He had
next to nothing to say. After a time she overheard Zada say to him,
raising her voice to top the noise of the band: "Say, Peterkin,
see that great big lad over there, the human lighthouse by the sea?
Peterkin, you can't miss him--he's just standing up--yes--isn't
that Jim Dyckman? Is he really so rich as they say?"

"He's rotten rich!" said Peterkin.

Then Zada said something and pointed. She seemed to be excited, but
not half so excited as Peter was. His face was all shot up with red,
and he looked as if he had eaten something that didn't sit easy.

Then he looked as if he wanted to fight somebody. He began to chew
on his words.

Kedzie caught only a few phrases in the holes in the noisy music.

"When did she get back? And she's here with him? I'll kill him--"

Kedzie stood on tiptoe, primevally trying to lift her ears higher
still to hear what followed. She saw Zada putting her hand on
Peter's sleeve, and she heard Zada say:

"Don't start anything here. Remember I got a reputation to lose,
if you haven't."

This had the oddest effect on Peter. He stared at Zada, and his anger
ran out of his face just as the water ran out of the silver washbowl
in the sleeping-car. Then he began to laugh softly, but as if he
wanted to laugh right out loud. He put his napkin up and laughed
into that.

And then the anger he had lost ran up into Zada's face, and she
looked at Peter as if she wanted to kill him.

Now it was Peter who put his hand on her arm and patted it and said,
"I didn't mean anything."

Mean what? Kedzie wondered. But she had no chance to find out, for
Peter rose from the table and, dodging around the dancing couples,
made his escape. He reappeared in the very nook where Kedzie watched,
and called up to Zada:

"Did they see me?"

Zada shook her head. Peter threw her a kiss. She threw him a shrug
of contempt. Peter went away laughing. Kedzie waited a few minutes
and saw that Mr. Devoe had come to sit with Zada.

After a moment the music was resumed, and Zada rose to dance again
with Mr. Devoe--a curious sort of dance, in which she lifted her feet
high and placed them carefully, as if she were walking on a floor
covered with eggs and didn't want to break any.

But Kedzie's eyes were filling with sand. They had gazed too long
at brilliance. She dashed back to the elevator and to her room.
She was exhausted, and she pulled off her clothes and let them lie
where they fell. She slid her weary frame between the sheets and
instantly slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

Charity Coe danced till all hours with Jim, with Tom Duane and
other men, and no one could have fancied that she had ever known
or cared what horrors filled the war hospitals across the sea.

She was frantic enough to accept a luncheon engagement with Jim and
his mother for the next day. She telephoned him in the morning: "Your
angel of a mother will forgive me when you tell her I'm lunching
down-town with my husband. The poor boy was detained at his office
last night and didn't get my telegram till he got home. When he
learned that I had come in and gone out again he was furious with
himself and me. I hadn't left word where I was, so he couldn't come
running after me. He waited at home and gave me a love of a call-down
for my dissipation. It was a treat. I really think he was jealous."

Jim Dyckman did not laugh with her. He was thinking hard. He had seen
Cheever at the Biltmore, and a little later Cheever vanished. Cheever
must have seen Charity Coe then. And if he saw her, he saw him. Then
why had he kept silent? Dyckman had a chilling intuition that Cheever
was lying in ambush for him.

Again he was wrung with the impulse to tell Charity Coe the truth
about her husband. Again some dubious decency withheld him.




CHAPTER VII

The word "breakfast" was magic stimulant to the Thropps. Kedzie put
on her clothes, and the family went down to the elevator together.

They found their way to the Tudor Room, where a small number of men,
mostly barricaded behind newspapers, ate briskly. A captain showed
the Thropps to a table; three waiters pulled out their chairs and
pushed them in under them. Another laid large pasteboards before
them. Another planted ice-water and butter and salt and pepper
here and there.

Adna had traveled enough to know that the way to order a meal in
a hotel is to give the waiter a wise look and say, "Bring me the
best you got."

This waiter looked a little surprised, but he said, "Yes, sir. Do
you like fruit and eggs and rolls, maybe?"

"Nah," said Adna. "Breakfast's my best meal. Bring us suthin' hearty
and plenty of it. I like a nice piece of steak and fried potatoes
and some griddle-cakes and maple-surrup, and if you got any nice
sawsitch--and the wife usually likes some oatmeal, and she takes tea
and toast, but bring me some hot bread. And the girl--What you want,
Kedzie? The same's I'm takin'? All right. Oh, some grape-fruit, eh?
She wants grape-fruit. Got any good? All right. I guess I'll take
some grape-fruit, too; and let me see--I guess that'll do to start
on--Wait! What's that those folks are eatin' over there? Looks good
--spring chicken--humm! I guess you'd like that better'n steak, ma?
Yes. She'd rather have the chicken. All right, George, you hustle us
in a nice meal and I'll make it all right with you. You understand."

Adna called all waiters "George." It saved their feelings, he
had heard.

The waiter bowed and retired. Adna spoke to his family:

"Since we pay the same, anyway, might's well have the best they got."

The waiter gave the three a meal fitter for the ancient days when
kings had dinner at nine in the morning than for these degenerate
times when breakfast hardly lives up to its name.

The waiter and his cronies stood at a safe distance and watched
the Thropps surround that banquet. They wondered where the old man
got money enough to buy such breakfasts and why he didn't spend some
of it on clothes.

The favorite theory was that he was a farmer on whose acres somebody
had discovered oil or gold and bought him out for a million.
Mr. Thropp's proper waiter hoped that he would be as extravagant
with his tip as he was with his order. He feared not. His waiterly
intuition told him the old man put in with more enthusiasm than he
paid out.

At last the meal was over. The Thropps were groaning. They had not
quite absorbed the feast, but they had wrecked it utterly. Mr. Thropp
found only one omission in the perfect service. The toothpicks had to
be asked for. All three Thropps wanted them.

While Thropp was fishing in his pocket for a quarter, and finding
only half a dollar which he did not want to reveal, the waiter
placed before him a closely written manuscript, face down, with
a lead-pencil on top of it.

"What's this?" said Thropp.

"Will you please to sign your name and room number, sir?" the waiter
suggested.

"Oh, I see," said Thropp, and explained to his little flock. "You see,
they got to keep tabs on the regular boarders."

Then he turned the face of the bill to the light. His pencil could
hardly find a place to put his name in the long catalogue. He noted
a sum scrawled in red ink: "$11.75."

"Wha-what's this?" he said, faintly.

The surprised waiter explained with all suavity: "The price of
the breakfast. If it is not added correctlee--"

Thropp added it with accurate, but tremulous, pencil. The total
was correct, if the items were. He explained:

"But I'm a regular--er--roomer here. I pay by the week."

"Yes, sir--if you will sign, it will be all right."

"But that don't mean they're going to charge me for breakfast? 'Levum
dollars and seventy-five cents for--for breakfast?--for a small family
like mine is? Well, I'd like to see 'em! What do they think I am!"

The waiter maintained his courtesy, but Adna was infuriated. He
put down no tip at all. He lifted his family from the table with
a yank of the eyes and snapped at the waiter:

"I'll soon find out who's tryin' to stick me.--you or the
proprietor."

The old man stalked out, followed by his fat ewe and their ewe lamb.
Adna's very toothpick was like a small bayonet.

His wife and daughter hung back to avoid being spattered with the gore
of the unfortunate hotel clerk. The morning trains were unloading
their mobs, and it was difficult to reach the desk at all.

When finally Adna got to the bar he had lost some of his running
start. With somewhat weakly anger he said to the first clerk
he reached:

"Looky here! I registered here last night, and another young feller
was here said the two rooms would be twelve dollars."

"Yes, sir."

"Well, they sent me up to roost on a cloud, but I didn't kick. Now
they're tryin' to charge me for meals extry. Don't that twelve dollars
include meals?"

"Oh no, sir. The hotel is on the European plan."

Adna took the shock bravely but bitterly: "Well, all I got to say is
the Europeans got mighty poor plans. I kind of suspicioned there was
a ketch in it somewheres. After this we'll eat outside, and at the
end of the week we'll take our custom somewheres else. Maybe there
was a joke in that twelve dollars a week for the rooms, too."

"Twelve dollars a week! Oh no, sir; the charge is by the day."

Adna's knees seemed to turn to sand and run down into his shoes.
He supported himself on his elbows.

"Twelve dollars a day--for those two rooms on the top of the moon?"

"Yes, sir; that's the rate, sir."

Adna was going rapidly. He chattered, "Ain't there no police in
this town at tall?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, I've heard they're the wust robbers of all. We'll see
about this." He went back to his women folk and mumbled, "Come on
up-stairs."

They followed, Mrs. Thropp murmuring to Kedzie: "Looks like poppa
was goin' to be sick. I'm afraid he et too much of that rich food."

The elevator flashed them to their empyrean floor. Adna did not
speak till they were in their room and he had lowered himself feebly
into a chair. He spoke thickly:

"Do you know what that Judas Iscariot down there is doin' to us?
Chargin' us twelve dollars a day for these two cubby-holes--a day!
Twelve dollars a day! Eighty-four dollars a week! And that breakfast
was 'levum dollars and seventy-five cents! If I'd gave the waiter
the quarter I was goin' to, it would have made an even dozen dollars!
for breakfast! I don't suppose anybody would ever dast order a dinner
here. Why, they'd skin a millionaire and pick his bones in a week.
We'd better get out before they slap a mortgage on my house."

"Well, I just wouldn't pay it," said Mrs. Thropp. "I'd see the police
about such goings-on."

"The police!" groaned Thropp. "They're in cahoots with the burglars
here. This hull town is a den of thieves. I've always heard it, and
now I know it."

He was ashamed of himself for being taken in so. He began to throw
into the valises the duds that had been removed.

Throughout the panic Kedzie had stood about in a kind of stupor.
When her father tapped her on the shoulder and repeated his
"C'm'on!" she turned to him eyes all tears glistening like bubbles,
and she whimpered:

"Oh, daddy, the view! The nice things!"

Adna snapped: "View? Our next view will be the poorhouse if we don't
hustle our stumps. We got to get out of here and find the cheapest
place they is in town to live or go back home on the next train."

Kedzie began to cry, to cry as she had cried when she wept in
her cradle because candy had been taken from her, or a box of
carpet-tacks, or the scissors that she had somehow got hold of.

Adna dropped his valises with a thud. He began to upbraid her.
He had endured too much. He had still his bill to pay. He told her
that she was a good-for-nothin' nuisance and he wished he had left
her home. He'd never take her anywheres again, you bet. Kedzie
lost her reason entirely. She was shattered with spasms of grief
aggravated by her mother's ferocity and her father's. She could not
give up this splendor. She would not go to a cheap place to live.
She would never go back home. She would rather die.

Her mother boxed her ears and shook her and scolded with all her
vim. But Kedzie only shook out more sobs till they wondered what
the people next door would think. Adna was wan with wrath. Kedzie
was afraid of her father's look. She had a kind of lockjaw of grief
such as children suffer and suffer for.

All she would answer to her father's threats was: "I won't! I won't!
I tell you I won't!"

Her cheeks were blubbered, her nose red, her mouth swollen, her hair
wet and stringy. She gulped and swallowed and beat her hands together
and stamped her feet.

Adna glared at her in hatred equal to her own for him. He said to
his wife: "Ma, we got to go back to first principles with that girl.
You got to give her a good beatin'."

Mrs. Thropp had the will but not the power. She was palsied with
rage. "I can't," she faltered.

"Then I will!" said Adna, and he roared with ferocity, "Come here
to me, you!"

He put out his hand like a claw, and Kedzie retreated from him. She
stopped sobbing. She had never been so frightened. She felt a new
kind of fright, the fright of a nun at seeing an altar threatened
with desecration. She had not been whipped for years. She had grown
past that. Surely her body was sacred from such infamy now.

"Come here to me, I tell you!" Adna snarled, as he pursued her
slowly around the chairs.

"You better not whip me, poppa," Kedzie mumbled. "You better not
touch me, I tell you. You'll be sorry if you do! You better not!"

"Come here to me!" said Adna.

"Momma, momma, don't let him!" Kedzie whispered as she ran to her
mother and flung herself in her arms for refuge.

Mrs. Thropp then lost a great opportunity forever. She tore the
girl's hands away and handed her over to her father. And he, with
ugly fury and ugly gesture, seized the young woman who had been
his child and dragged her to him and sank into a chair and wrenched
and twisted her arms till he held her prone across his knees. Then
he spanked her with the flat of his hand.

Kedzie made one little outcry; then there was no sound but the thump
of the blows. Adna sickened soon of his task, and Kedzie's silence
and non-resistance robbed him of excuse. He growled:

"I guess that'll learn you who's boss round here."

He thrust her from his knees, and she rolled off to the floor and
lay still. She had not really swooned, but her soul had felt the
need of withdrawing into itself to ponder this awful sacrilege.




CHAPTER VIII

Her mother knew that she had not fainted. She was sick, too, and
blamed Kedzie for the scene. She spurned the girl with her foot
and said:

"You get right up off that floor this minute. Do you hear?"

Kedzie's soul came back. It had made its decision. It gathered
her body together and lifted it up to its knees and then erect,
while the lips said, "All right, momma."

She groped her way into the bathroom and washed her face, and
straightened her hair and came forth, a dazed and pallid thing.
She took up the valise her father gave her and followed her mother
out, pausing to pass her eyes about the beautiful room and the
window where the peaks of splendor were. Then she walked out,
and her father locked the door.

Kedzie saw that the elevator-boy saw that she had been crying, but
what was one shame extra? She had no pride left now, and no father
and no mother, no anybody.

Adna refused the offices of the pages who clutched at the baggage.
He went to the cashier and paid the blood-money with a grin of hate.
Then he gathered up his women and his other baggage and set out
for the station. He would leave all the baggage there while he
hunted a place to stop.

They could not find the tunnelway, but debouched on the street.
Crossing Vanderbilt Avenue was a problem for village folk heavy
laden. The taxicabs were hooting and scurrying.

Adna found himself in the middle of the street, entirely surrounded
by demoniac motors. His wife wanted to lie down there and die. Adna
dared neither to go nor to stay. Suddenly a chauffeur of an empty
limousine, fearing to lose a chance to swear at a taxi-driver,
kept his head turned to the left and steered straight for the spot
where the Thropps awaited their doom.

Adna had his wife pendent from one arm and a valise or two from
the other. Kedzie carried a third valise. Her better than normal
shoulders were sagged out of line by its weight.

When Adna saw the motor coming he had to choose between dropping
his valise or his wife. Characteristically, he saved his valise.

In spite of his wife's squawking and tugging on his left arm, he
achieved safety under the portico of the Grand Central Terminal.
He looked about for Kedzie. She was not to be seen. Adna saw the
taxicab pass over the valise she had carried. It left no trace of
Kedzie. Her annihilation was uncanny. He gaped.

"Where's Kedzie?" Mrs. Thropp screamed.

A policeman checked the traffic with uplifted hand. Adna ran to him.
Mrs. Thropp told him what had happened.

"I saw the goil drop the bag and beat it for the walk," said
the officer.

"Which way'd she go?"

"She lost herself in the crowd," said the officer.

"She was scared out of her wits," Mrs. Thropp sobbed.

The officer shook his head. "She was smilin' when I yelled at her.
It looks to me like a get-away."

"A runaway?" Mrs. Thropp gasped.

"Yes,'m. I'd have went after her, but I was cut off by a taxi."

The two old Thropps stood staring at each other and the unfathomable
New York, while the impatient chauffeurs squawked their horns in
angry protest, and train-missers with important errands thrust
their heads out of cab windows.

The officer led his bewildered charges to the sidewalk, motioned
the traffic to proceed, and beckoned to a patrolman. "Tell your
troubles to him," he said, and went back into his private maelstrom.

The patrolman heard the Thropp story and tried to keep the crowd away.
He patted Mrs. Thropp's back and said they'd find the kid easy, not
to distoib herself. He told the father which station-house to go to
and advised him to have the "skipper" send out a "general."

Thropp wondered what language he spoke, but he went; and a
soft-hearted walrus in uniform sprawling across a lofty desk
took down names and notes and minute descriptions of Kedzie and
her costume. He told the two babes in the wood that such t'ings
happened constant, and the goil would toin up in no time. He sent
out a general alarm.

Mrs. Thropp told him the whole story, putting all the blame on
her husband with such enthusiasm that the sympathy of everybody
went out to him. Everybody included a number of reporters who
asked Mrs. Thropp questions and particularly desired a photograph
of Kedzie.

Mrs. Thropp confessed that she had not brought any along. She
had never dreamed that the girl would run away. If she had have,
she wouldn't have brought the girl along, to say nothing of
her photograph.

The amiable walrus in the cap and brass buttons recommended the
Thropps to a boarding-house whose prices were commensurate with
Adna's ideas and means, and he and his wife went thither, where
they told a shabby and sentimental landlady all their troubles.
She reassured them as best she could, and made a cup of tea for
Mrs. Thropp and told Mr. Thropp there was a young fellow lived in
the house who was working for a private detective bureau. He'd
find the kid sure, for it was a small woild, after all.

There was a lull in the European-war news the next day--only a few
hundreds killed in an interchange of trenches. There was a dearth
of big local news also. So the morning papers all gave Kedzie Thropp
the hospitality of their head-lines. The illustrated journals
published what they said was her photograph. No two of the
photographs were alike, but they were all pretty.

The copy-writers loved the details of the event. They gave the
dialogue of the Thropps in many versions, all emphasizing what
is known as "the human note."

Every one of them gave due emphasis to the historic fact that Kedzie
Thropp had been spanked.

The boarding-house was shaken from attic to basement by the news.
The Thropps read the papers. They were astounded and enraged at
gaining publicity for such a deed. They visited the walrus in his den.
But there was no word of Kedzie Thropp. The sea of people had opened
and swallowed the little girl. Her mother wondered where she had
slept and if she were hungry and into whose hands she had fallen.
But there was no answer from anywhere.




CHAPTER IX

People who call a child in from All Outdoors and make it their infant
owe it to their victim to be rich, brilliant, and generous. Kedzie
Thropp's parents were poor, stupid, and stingy.

They were respectable enough, but not respectful at all. Children
have more dignity than anybody else, because they have not lived
long enough to have their natal dignity knocked out of them.

Kedzie's parents ought to have respected hers, but they subjected her
to odious humiliation. When her father threatened to spank her--and
did--and when her mother aided and abetted him, they forfeited all
claim to her tolerance. The inspiration to run away was forced on
Kedzie, though she would have said that her parents ran away from
her first.

Kedzie had preferred her own life to the security of her valise.
She dropped the bag without hesitation. When the taxicab parted her
family in the middle, Kedzie ran to the opposite sidewalk. She saw
a policeman dashing into the thick of the motors. Her eye caught his.
He beckoned to her that he would ferry her across the torrent. He
was a nice-looking man, but she shook her head at him. She smiled,
however, and hastened away.

Freedom had been forced on her. Why should she relinquish the boon?

She lost herself in the crowd. She had no purpose or destination,
for the whole city was a mystery to her. Soon she noted that part of
the human stream flowed down into the yawning maw of a Subway kiosk
as the water ran out of the bath-tub in the hotel. She floated down
the steps and found herself in a big subterrene room with walls tiled
like those of the hotel bathroom. Everybody was buying tickets from
a man in a funny little cage.

Kedzie had a hand-bag slung at her wrist. In it was some small money.
She fished out a nickel and slid it across the glass sill as the
others did.

Beneath her eyes she saw a card that asked, "How many?" She said,
"One."

The doleful ticket-seller was annoyed at the tautology of passing
him a nickel and saying, "One!" He shot out an angry glance with
the ticket, but he melted at sight of Kedzie's lush beauty, recognized
her unquestionable plebeiance, and hailed her with a "Here you are,
Cutie."

Kedzie was not at all insulted. She gave him smile for smile, took up
her pasteboard and followed the crowd through the gate.

The ticket-chopper yelled at the back of her head, "Here, where you
goin'?"

She turned to him, and his scowl relaxed. He pointed to the box
and pleaded:

"Put her there, miss, if you please."

She smiled at the ticket-chopper and dropped the flake into the box.
She moved down the stairway as an express rolled in. People ran.
Kedzie ran. They squeezed in at the side door, and so did Kedzie.
The wicker seats were full, and so Kedzie stood. She could not reach
the handles that looked like cruppers. Men and women saw how pretty
she was. She was so pretty that one or two men nearly rose and
offered her their seats. When the train whooped round the curve
beneath Times Square Kedzie was spun into the lap of a man reading
a prematurely born "Night Edition."

She came through the paper like a circus-lady, and the man was
indignant till he saw what he held. Then he laughed foolishly,
helped the giggling Kedzie to her feet and rose to his own, gave her
his place, and went blushing into the next car. For an hour after
his arms felt as if they had clasped a fugitive nymph for a moment
before she escaped.

This train chanced to be an express to 180th Street in the Bronx
Borough. If any one had asked Kedzie if she knew the Bronx she would
probably have answered that she did not know them. She did not even
know what a borough was.

It was fascinating how much Kedzie did not know. She had an infinite
fund of things to find out.

She was thrilled thoroughly by the glorious velocity through
the tunnel. The train stopped at Seventy-second Street and at
Ninety-sixth Street and at many other stations. People got on
or off. But Kedzie was too well entertained to care to leave.

She did not know that the train ran under a corner of Central Park
and beneath the Harlem River. She would have liked to know. To run
under a river would tell well at home.

Suddenly the Subway shot out into midair and became a superway.
The street which had been invisible above was suddenly visible below,
with street-cars on it. Also there was a still higher track overhead.
Three layers of tracks! It was heavenly, the noise they made! She
enjoyed hearing the mounting numbers of the streets shouted
antiphonally by the gentlemen at either door.

At 180th Street, however, the train stopped for good, and the handsome
young man at the front door called, "All out!" He said it to Kedzie
with a beautiful courtesy, adding, "This is as far as we go, lady."

That was tremendous, to be called "lady." Kedzie tried to get out
like one. She smiled at the guard and left his protection with some
reluctance. He studied her as she walked along the platform. She
seemed to meet with his approval in general, and in particular.
He sighed when she turned out of his sight.

The station here was very high up in the world. Kedzie counted
seventy-seven steps on her way to the level. She was distressed
to find herself in a shabby, noisy community where streets radiated
in six directions. Her fears were true. She had left New York. She
must get home to it again.

She walked back along the way she had come, on the sidewalk beneath
the tracks. This meandering street was called Boston Road. Kedzie had
no ideas as to the distance of Boston. She only knew that New York
was good enough for her--the New York of Forty-second Street,
of course. Kedzie did not know yet how many, many New Yorks there
are in New York.

She was discouraged by her present surroundings. Along the rough
and neglected streets were little rows of shanty shops, and there
were stubby frame residences.

There was one two-story cottage snuggling against a hill; it had
a little picket fence with a little picket gate leading to a little
ragged yard with an old apple-tree in it; and there was a pair of
steps up to the front door, and a rough trellis from there to the
woodshed with a grapevine draped across it. It was of the James
Whitcomb Riley school of architecture--a house with a woodshed.

Rich people who were tired of the city, and chanced that way,
used to pause and look at that little nook and admire its meek
attractiveness. It made them homesick.

But Kedzie was sick of home. This lowly cot was too much like
her father's. It had a sign on it that said, "To Let." It was
a funny expression. Kedzie studied it a long time before she
decided that it was New-Yorkese for "For Rent."

She shuddered at the idea of renting or letting such a house--
especially as it was so close to a church, a small, seedy,
frame church nearly all roof, a narrow-chested, slope-shouldered
churchlet with a frame cupola for a steeple. It looked abandoned,
and an ivy flourished on it so impudently that it almost closed
the unfrequented portal.

The bill-boards here made mighty interesting reading. There were
magnificent works of an art on the grand scale of a people's
gallery; one structure promulgated the glories of a notorious
chewing-gum. There was a gorgeous proclamation of a fashionable
glove with a picture of an extremely swell slim lady all dressed
up--or rather all dressed down--for the opera.

Kedzie prayed the Lord to send her some day a pair of full-length
white kid gloves like those. As for a box at the opera, she would
take her chances on the sunniest cloud-sofa in heaven for an evening
at the opera. And for a dress cut deckolett and an aigret in her
hair, she would have swapped a halo and a set of wings.

There was no end to the big pages of this literature, and Kedzie read
dozens of them from right to left in a southerly direction. Finally
she abandoned the Boston Road and walked over to a better-groomed
avenue with more of a city atmosphere.

But she saw a police signal-station at 175th Street, and she thought
it better to abandon the Southern Boulevard. She was not sure of her
police yet, and she had an uneasy feeling that her father and mother
were at that moment telling their troubles to some policeman who
would shortly be putting her description in the hands of detectives.
She did not want to be arrested. Poppa might try to spank her again.
She did not want to have to murder anybody, especially her parents.
She liked them better when she was away from them.

She hated to waste five cents on a street-car, but finally she
achieved the extravagance. The car went sliding and grinding through
an amazing amount of paved street, with an inconceivable succession
of apartment-houses and shops.

At length she reached a center of what she most desired--noise and
mob and hurry. At 164th Street she came to a star of streets where
the Third Avenue Elevated collaborated with the surface-cars and the
loose traffic to create a delicious pandemonium. She loved those high
numbers--a hundred and eighty streets! Beautiful! At home Main Street
dissolved into pastures at Tenth Street.

She wanted to find Main Street in New York and see what First Street
looked like. It was probably along the Atlantic Ocean. That also was
one of the things she must see--her first ocean!

But while Kedzie was reveling in the splendors of 164th Street her
eye was caught by the gaudy placards of a moving-picture emporium.
There was a movie-palace at home. It was the town's one metropolitan
charm.

There was a lithograph here that reached out and caught her like
a bale-hook. It represented an impossibly large-eyed girl, cowering
behind a door on whose other side stood a handsome devil in evening
dress. He was tugging villainously at a wicked mustache, and his eyes
were thrillingly leery. Behind a curtain stood a young man who held
a revolver and waited. The title of the picture decided Kedzie. It
was "The Vampire's Victim; a Scathing Exposure of High Society."

Kedzie studied hard. For all her gipsy wildness, she had a trace
of her father's parsimony, and she hated to spend money that was
her very own. Some of the dimes and quarters in that little purse
had been there for ages. Besides, her treasury would have to sustain
her for an indefinite period.

But she wanted to know about high society. She was not sure what
_scathing_ meant, or what the pronunciation of it was. She
rather inclined to _"scat-ting."_ Anyway, it looked important.

She stumbled into the black theater and found a seat among mysterious
persons dully silhouetted against the screen. This was none of
the latter-day temples where moving pictures are run through with
cathedral solemnity, soft lights, flowers, orchestral uplift, and
nearly classic song. This was a dismal little tunnel with one end
lighted by the twinkling pictures. Tired mothers came here to escape
from their children, and children came here to escape from their
tired mothers. The plots of the pictures were as trite and as rancid
as spoiled meat, but they suited the market. This plot concerned
a beautiful girl who came to the city from a small town. She was a
good girl, because she came from a small town and had poor parents.

She was dazzled a little, however, by the attentions of a swell devil
of great wealth, and she neglected her poor--therefore honest--lover
temporarily. She learned the fearful joys of a limousined life, and
was lured into a false marriage which nearly proved her ruin. The
villain got a fellow-demon to pretend to be a minister, put on false
hair, reversed his collar, and read the wedding ceremony; and the
heroine was taken to the rich man's home.

The rooms were as full of furniture as a furniture-store, and so
Kedzie knew it was a swell home. Also there was a butler who walked
and acted like a wooden man.

The heroine was becomingly shy of her husband, but finally went to
her room, where a swell maid put her to bed (with a proper omission
of critical moments) in a bed that must have cost a million dollars.
Some womanly, though welching, intuition led the bride to lock
her door. Some manly intuition led the hero to enter the gardens
and climb in through a window into the house. If he had not been
a hero it would have been a rather reprehensible act. But to the
heroes all things are pure. He prowled through the house heroically
without attracting attention. Every step of his burglarious progress
was applauded by the audience.

The hero hid behind one of those numberless portieres that hang
everywhere in the homes of the _moveaux riches,_ and waited
with drawn revolver for the dastard bridegroom to attempt his
hellish purpose.

The locked door thwarted the villain for the time, and he decided
to wait till he got the girl aboard one of those yachts which rich
people keep for evil purposes. Thus the villain unwittingly saved
the hero from the painful necessity of committing murder, and added
another reel to the picture.

It is not necessary and it might infringe a copyright to tell
the rest of the story. It would be insulting to say that the false
minister, repenting, told the hero, who told the heroine after he
rescued her from the satanic yacht and various other temptations.
Of course she married the plain-clothes man and lived happily ever
after in a sin-proof cottage with a garden of virtuous roses.

Kedzie was so excited that she annoyed the people about her, but
she learned again the invaluable lesson that rich men are unfit
companions for nice girls. Kedzie resolved to prove this for herself.
She prayed for a chance to be tempted so that she might rebuke some
swell villain. But she intended to postpone the rebuke until she had
seen a lot of high life. This would serve a double purpose: Kedzie
would get to see more millionairishness, and the rebuke would be
more--more "_scatting_." It is hard even to think a word you
cannot pronounce.

Kedzie gained one thing further from the pictures--a new name. She
had been musing incessantly on choosing one. She had always hated
both _Thropp_ and _Kedzie,_ and had counted on marriage
to reform her surname. But she could not wait. She wanted an alias
at once. The police were after her. The heroine of this picture
was named _Anita Adair,_ and the name just suited Kedzie. She
intended to be known by it henceforth.

She had not settled on what town she had come from. Perhaps she would
decide to have been born in New York. She rather fancied the notion
of being a daughter of a terrible swell family who wanted to force
her to marry a wicked old nobleman, but she ran away sooner than
submit to the _"imfany"_--that was the way Kedzie pronounced
it in her head. It was a word she had often seen but never heard.

Meanwhile she was sure of one thing: Kedzie Thropp was annihilated
and Anita Adair was born full grown.

At the conclusion of the film Kedzie was saddened by a ballad sung by
an adenoid tenor. The song was a scatting exposure of the wickedness
of Broadway. The refrain touched Kedzie deeply, and alarmed her
somewhat. It reiterated and reiterated:

"There's a browkin hawt for everee light ton Broadway-ee."

Kedzie began to fear that she would furnish one more. And yet
it would be rather nice to have a broken heart, Kedzie thought,
especially on Broadway.




CHAPTER X

Kedzie watched the moving picture twice through. The second time
it was not so good. It lacked spontaneity and sincerity.

At the first vision everything seemed to rise from what preceded;
people did what was natural or noble. The second time it looked
mechanical, rehearsed; the thrill was gone, too, because she knew
positively that the hero was not really going to shoot, and
the villain was not really going to break through the door.

She wandered forth in a tragedy of disillusionment. That was really
the cause of the pout that seemed to say, "Please kiss me!" She pouted
because when she got what she wanted she no longer wanted it.

There are hearts like cold storage. They keep what they get fresh and
cool; and there are hearts that spoil whatever is intrusted to them.
In Kedzie's hot young soul, things spoiled soon.

She was hungry, and she could not resist the impulse to enter a cheap
restaurant. She did not know how cheap it was. It was as good as
the best restaurant in Nimrim, Mo.

Kedzie ordered unfamiliar things for the sake of educating her
illiterate mid-Western stomach. She ordered clam chowder and Hamburger
steak, spaghetti Italienne, lobster salad, and Neapolitan ice-cream.
She ate too much--much too much.

The total bill was ninety-five cents, and she was terrified. She had
thought her father a miser for complaining of the breakfast bill of
eleven-odd dollars at the Biltmore, but that was his money, not hers.

When she finished her meal she did not dream of tipping the waiter.
He seemed not to expect it, but he grinned as he asked her to come
again. He hoped she would. He went to the door and stared after her,
sadly, longingly. The dishes she had left he carried away with
an elegiac solemnity.

The streets were darkened now and the lights bewildered Kedzie.
The town grew more solemn. It withdrew into itself. People were
going home.

Kedzie did not know where to go. She walked for fear of standing
still. The noise fatigued her. She turned west to escape it and
found a little park at 161st Street.

Many streets flowed thence. There were ten ways to follow, and she
could not choose one among them.

She was pretty, but she had not learned the commercial value of
her beauty. She was alone in the great, vicious city, but nobody
had threatened her. Nearly everybody had paid her charm the tribute
of a stare or a smile, but nobody had been polite enough to flatter
her with a menace.

She was very pretty. But then there are so very many very pretty
girls in every big city! June with her millions of exquisite roses
is no richer in beauty than New York. Yet even New York cannot keep
all her beauties supplied with temptation and peril all the time.

Kedzie sat on the bench wondering which of the ten ways to go. It
turned late, but she could not decide. She began to be a little hungry
again, but she was always that, and she told her ever-willing young
stomach that her late luncheon would have to be an early dinner.

As she sat still, people began to peer at her through the enveiling
dark. A tipsy brewery truck-driver who had absorbed too much of his
own cargo sank down by her side. He could not see Kedzie through
the froth in his brain, but she found him fearful. When he began
to talk to himself she fled.

She saw a brilliantly lighted street-car, and she boarded it. She was
all turned around, and the car twisted and turned as it proceeded.
She did not realize that it was going north till she heard the
conductor calling in higher and higher street numbers. Then she
understood, with tired wrath, that she was outbound once more. She
wanted to go toward the heart of town, but she could not afford to
get off without her nickel's worth of ride.

The car was all but empty when the conductor called to a drowsy old
lady, his penultimate passenger:

"Hunneran Semty-seckin! Hey, lady! You ast me to leave you off at
Hunneran Semty-seckin, didn't yah?"

The woman was startled from her reverie and gasped:

"Dear me! is this a Hundred and Seventy-second?"

"Thass wat I said, didn't I?"

She evicted herself with a manner of apology for intruding on
the conductor's attention.

Now Kedzie was alone with the man. His coyote bark changed to an
insinuating murmur. He sat down near Kedzie, took up an abandoned
evening paper, and said:

"Goin' all the way, Cutie, or how about it?"

"I'm get'n' off here!" said Kedzie, with royal scorn. She resented
his familiarity, and she was afraid that he was going to prove
dangerous. Perhaps he meant to abduct her in this chariot.

Being a street-car conductor, the poor fellow neither understood
women nor was understood by them. He accepted Kedzie's blow with
resignation. He helped her down the step, his hand mellowing her
arm and finding it ripe.

She flung him a rebukeful glare that he did not get. He gave the
two bells, and the car went away like a big lamp, leaving the world
to darkness and to Kedzie.

She walked for a block or two and wondered where she should sleep.
There were no hotels up here, and she would have been afraid of
their prices. Probably they all charged as much as the Biltmore.
At that rate, her money would just about pay for the privilege of
walking in and out again.

Boarding-houses there might have been, but they bore no
distinguishing marks.

Kedzie stood and strolled until she was completely fagged. Then she
encountered a huge mass of shadowy foliage, a park--Crotona Park,
although of course Kedzie did not know its name.

There were benches at the edge, and concreted paths went glimmering
among vagueness of foliage, with here and there searing arc-lights
as bright as immediate moons. Kedzie dropped to the first bench, but
a couple of lovers next to her protested, and she retreated into
the park a little.

She felt a trifle chilled with weariness and discouragement and
the lack of light. She clasped her arms together as a kind of wrap
and huddled herself close to herself. Her head teetered and tottered
and gradually sank till her delicate chin rested in her delicate
bosom. Her big hat shaded her face as in a deep blot of ink, and
she slept.

Unprotected, pretty, alone in the wicked city, she slept secure
and unassailed.




CHAPTER XI

Miss Anita Adair (_nee_ Kedzie Thropp) had dozed upon her cozy
park bench for an uncertain while when her bedroom was invaded by
visitors who did not know she was there.

Kedzie was wakened by murmurous voices. A man was talking to a woman.
They might have been Romeo and Juliet in Verona for the poetry of
their grief, but they were in the Bronx Borough, and he was valet
and she a housemaid, or so Kedzie judged. The man was saying in a
dialect new to Kedzie:

"Ah, _ma pauvre p'tite amie,_ for why you have a _jalousie_
of my _patrie_?"

There was a vague discussion from which Kedzie drowsily gleaned
that the man was going to cross the sea to the realm of destruction.
The girl was jealous of somebody that he called his _patrie,_
and he miserably endeavored to persuade her that a man could love
both his _patrie_ and his _amie_, and yet give his life
to the former at her call.

Kedzie was too sleepy to feel much curiosity. A neighbor's woe is
a soothing lullaby. In the very crisis of their debate, the little
moan of Kedzie's yawn startled and silenced the farewellers. They
stole away unseen, and she knew no more of them.

Hours later Kedzie woke, shivering and afraid. All about her was
a woodland hush, but the circle of the horizon was dimly lighted,
as if there were houses on fire everywhere in the distance.

Poor Kedzie was a-cold and filled with the night dread. She was
afraid of burglars, mice, ghosts. She was still more afraid to leave
her bench and hunt through those deep shadows for her lost New York.
Her drugged brain fell asleep as it wrestled with its fears. Her body
protested at its couch. All her limbs like separate serpents tried
to find resting-places. They could not stretch themselves out on
the bench. Fiends had placed cast-iron braces at intervals to prevent
people from doing just that. Kedzie did not know that it is against
the law of New York, if not of Nature, to sleep on park benches.

Half unconsciously she slipped down to the ground and found a bed
on the warm and dewless grass. Her members wriggled and adjusted
themselves. Her head rolled over on one round arm for a pillow;
the other arm bent itself above her head, and finding her hat in
the way, took out the pins, lifted the hat off, set it on the ground,
put the pins back in and returned to its place about her hair--all
without disturbing Kedzie's beauty sleep.

Her two arms were all the maids that Kedzie had ever had. They
were as kind to her as they could be--devoted almost exclusively
to her comfort.




CHAPTER XII

Kedzie slept alone in a meadow, and slept well. Youth spread the
sward with mattresses of eiderdown, and curtained out the stars
with silken tapestry. If she dreamed at all, it was with the full
franchise of youth in the realm of ambition. If she dreamed herself
a great lady, then fancy promised her no more than truth should
redeem. Charity Coe Cheever had a finer bed but a poorer sleep, if
any at all. She had a secretary to do her chores for her and to tell
her her engagements--where she was to go and what she had promised
and what she had better do. Charity dictated letters and committee
reports; she even dictated checks on her bank-account (which kept
filling up faster than she drew from it).

While Kedzie was trying to fit her limber frame among the little
hillocks and tussocks on the ground, Charity Coe was sitting at
her dressing-table, gazing into the mirror, but seeing beyond
her own image. Her lips moved, and her secretary wrote down what
she said aloud, and her maid was kneeling to take off Charity Coe's
ballroom slippers and slip on her bedroom ditto. The secretary was
so sleepy that she tried to keep her eyes open by agitating the lids
violently. The maid was trying to keep from falling forward across
her mistress's insteps and sleeping there.

But Charity was wide-awake--wild awake. Her soul was not in her
dictation, but in her features, which she studied in the mirror as
a rich man studies his bank-account. Charity was wondering if she
had wrecked her beauty beyond repair, or if she could fight it back.

Charity Coe, being very rich, had a hundred arms and hands and feet,
eyes and ears, while Kedzie had but two of each. Charity had some one
to make her clothes for her and cut up her bread and meat and fetch
the wood for her fire and put her shoes on and take them off. She
even had her face washed for her and her hair brushed, and somebody
trimmed her finger-nails and swept out her room, sewed on her buttons
and buttoned them up or unbuttoned them, as she pleased.

If Kedzie had known how much Charity was having done for her she
would have had a colic of envy. But she slept while Charity could
not. Charity could not pay anybody to sleep for her or stay awake
for her, or love or kiss for her, and her wealth could not buy the
fidelity of the one man whose fidelity she wanted to own.

Charity had done work that Kedzie would have flinched from. Charity
had lived in a field hospital and roughed it to a loathsome degree.
She had washed the faces and bodies of grimy soldiers from the bloody
ditches of the war-front; she had been chambermaid to gas-blinded
peasants and had done the hideous chores that follow operations. Now
with a maid to change her slippers and a secretary to make up her
mind, and a score of servants within call, she was afraid that she
had squandered her substance in spendthrift alms. She was a prodigal
benefactress returned from her good works too late, perhaps. She
wondered and took stock of her charms. She rather underrated them.

Peter Cheever had been extravagantly gallant the morning after
her return from the mountains. He had added the last perfect tribute
of suspicion and jealousy. They had even breakfasted together. She
had dragged herself down to the dining-room, and he had neglected
his morning paper, and lingered for mere chatter. He had telephoned
from his office to ask her for the noon hour, too. He had taken her
to the Bankers' Club for luncheon in the big Blue Room. He had then
suggested that they dine together and go to any theater she liked.

Charity Coe's head was turned by all this attention. "Three meals
a day and a show with her own husband" was going the honeymoon pace.

But she returned to the normal speed, for he did not come home
to dress or to dine or to go to the theater. No word came from him
until Charity Coe was all dressed; then a clerk telephoned her that
her husband regretted he could not come home, as he had to rush for
the Philadelphia train.

Charity could not quite disbelieve this, nor quite believe. She
had spent the evening debating married love and honeymoons that
wax and wane and wax again, and a wife's duty and her rights and
might-have-beens, perhapses, and if-only's.

Charity had put on her jewels, which had not been taken out of
the safe for years, but he had not arrived. Alarm and resentment
wrestled for her heart; they prospered alternately. Now she trembled
with fear for her husband; now she smothered with wrath at his
indifference to her.

Who was he that he should keep her waiting, and who were the Cheevers
that they should break engagements with the Coes? It was only at such
times that her pride of birth flared in her, and then only enough
to sustain her through grievous humiliations.

But what are humiliations that we should mind them so? They come
to everybody in turn, and they are as relentless and impersonal as
the sun marching around the sky. Kedzie had hers, and Charity hers,
and the streetcar conductor Kedzie had rebuffed had his, and the Czar
with his driven army had his, with more to come, and the Kaiser with
his victorious army had his, with more to come. Even Peter Cheever
had his in plenty, and of a peculiar secret sort.

He had honestly planned to spend his evening with his wife. She
seemed to be coming back into style with him. But the long arm
of the telephone brought him within the reach of Zada L'Etoile.
Zada had plans of her own for his evening-dinner, theater, supper,
dance till dawn. Peter had answered, gently:

"Sorry, but I'm booked."

Zada had seemed to come right through the wire at him.

"With that--wife of yours, of course!"

She had used a word that fascinated the listening Central, who was
lucky enough to transact a good deal of Zada's telephone business.
Central could almost see Peter flush as he shook his head and
answered:

"Not necessarily. It's business."

"You'd better make it your business not to go out with that woman,
anywhere," Zada had threatened. "It's indecent."

Peter winced. A wife is not ordinarily called "that woman." Peter
sighed. It was a pretty pass when a man could not be allowed to go
to the theater with his own wife. Yet he felt that Zada was right,
in a way. He had forfeited the privilege of a domestic evening. He
was afraid to brave Zada's fantastic rages. He could best protect
Charity Coe by continuing to ignore her.

He consented to Zada's plan and promised to call up his wife. Zada
took a brief triumph from that. But Peter was ashamed and afraid
to speak to Charity even across the wire. He knew that it has become
as difficult to lie by telephone as face to face. The treacherous
little quavers in the voice are multiplied to a rattle, and nothing
can ever quite imitate sincerity. So much is bound to be over or
under done.

Cheever made a pretense of rushing out of his office. He looked at
his watch violently, so that his secretary should be startled--as
he politely pretended to be. Cheever gasped, then rushed his lie
with sickly histrionism:

"I say, Hudspeth, call up my--Mrs. Cheever, will you? And--er--tell
her I've had to dash for the train to--er--Phila"--cough--"delphia.
Tell her I'm awfully sorry about to-night. Back to-morrow."

"Yessir," said Hudspeth, winking at the gaping stenographer, who
looked exclamation points at her typewriter.

Hudspeth called up Mrs. Cheever. He was no more convincing than
Cheever would have been. A note of disgust at his task and of
deprecatory pity for Mrs. Cheever influenced his tone.

Charity was not convinced, but she could hardly reveal that to
Hudspeth--although, of course, she did. She was betrayed by her
very eagerness to be a good sport easily bamboozled.

"Oh, I see. Too bad! I quite understand. Thank you, Mr. Hudspeth.
Good-by."

She did not hear Hudspeth growling to the stenographer as he strolled
over and leaned on her chair unnecessarily--there were other chairs
to lean on, and she was not deaf:

"Rotten business! He ought to be ashamed of himself. A nice wife
like that!"

The stenographer sat forward and snapped, "You got a nice wife
yourself." She was a little jealous of Zada, perhaps--or of
Mrs. Cheever--or of both.

Peter left his office to escape telephoning Charity, but he could
imagine how the message crushed her. He felt as if he had stepped
on a hurt bird. When he met Zada he kept trying to be patient and
forgiving with her, in spite of her blameworthiness.

Zada saw through his sullenness, and for a little moment was proud
of her victory. Then she began to suffer, too. She understood the
frailty of her hold on Cheever. His loyalty to her was in the eyes of
the world a treachery, and his disloyalty to her would be applauded
as a holy deed. She was becoming an old story with him, as Charity
had become one.

She suffered agonies from the cloud on her title and on her name,
and she was afraid of the world. A woman of her sort has no sympathy
to expect; her stock in trade vanishes without replenishment, and
her business does not build. In spite of herself she cannot help
envying and imitating the good women. As a certain great man has
confessed, "There is so much good in the worst of us," that there
is hardly any fun in being bad. It is almost impossible to be very
bad or very good very long at a time.

So here was Zada already copying a virtuous domestic woe and wondering
how she could fasten Cheever to her, win him truly for herself. She
honestly felt that she could be of value to him, and make more of
a man of him than his lawful wife ever could. Perhaps she was right.
At any rate, she was miserable, and if a person is going to be
miserable she might as well be right while her misery is going on.

Zada had dragged Cheever to a cabaret. She could lead him thither,
but she could not make him dance. She was one-stepping unwillingly
with a young cad who insulted her subtly in everything he said and
looked. She could not resent his familiarity beyond sneering at him
and calling him a foolish cub. She left him and returned to the table
where Peter Cheever smoked a bitter cigar. It is astonishing how sad
these notorious revelers look in repose. They are solemner than
deacons.

"Come on, Peterkin--dance the rest of this with me," Zada implored.

Peterkin shook his head. He felt that it was not quite right for him
to dance in public with such persons. He had his code. Even the swine
have their ethics. Zada put her hand in Cheever's arm and cooed
to him, but in vain.

It was then that Jim Dyckman caught sight of them. He was slinking
about the roofs as lonely and dejected as a homeless cat.

His money could not buy him companionship, though his acquaintance
was innumerable and almost anybody would have been proud to be spoken
to by such a money monster. But Jim did not want to be spoken to by
anybody who was ambitious to be spoken to by him. He wanted to talk
to Charity.

He could not even interest himself in dissipation. There was plenty
of it for sale, and markets were open to him that were not available
to average means. Many a foolish woman, irreproachable and counting
herself unapproachable, would have been strangely and memorably
perturbed by an amorous glance from Jim Dyckman.

But Jim did not want what he could get. He was hungry for
the companionship of Charity Coe.

When he saw her lord and master, Peter Cheever, with Zada, Dyckman
was enraged. Cheever owned Charity Coe; he could flatter her with
a smile, beckon her with a gesture, caress her at will, or leave her
in safe deposit, while he spent his precious hours with a public
servant!

Dyckman could usually afford to do what he wanted to. But now he
wanted to go to that table and knock the heads of Cheever and Zada
together; he wanted to make their skulls whack like castanets. But
he could not afford to do that.

He was so forlorn that he went home. His sumptuous chariot with
ninety race-horses concealed in the engine and velvet in its wheels
slid him as on smoothest ice to his father's home near the cathedral.
The house was like a child of the cathedral, and he went up its
steps as a pauper entering a cathedral. He gave up his hat and stick
and went past the masterpieces on his walls as if he were a visitor
to the Metropolitan Art Gallery on a free day. He stumbled up
the stairway, itself a work of art, like a boy sent to bed without
supper: he stumbled upstairs, wanting to cry and not daring to.

His valet undressed him in a motherly way and put him to bed.
The valet was feeling very sad. Dyckman realized that he was about
to lose Jules, and he felt more disconsolate. Still, he surprised
himself by breaking out:

"I wish you wouldn't go to the war, Jules."

Jules smiled with friendship and deference subtly blended:

"I wish I would not, too, sir."

"You might get killed, you know."

"Yes, sir."

"So you're a soldier! How long did you serve?"

"Shree years, sir."

"And I don't know the first thing about soldiering! I ought to be
ashamed of myself! Well--don't get killed, Jules."

"Very good, sir."

But he did.

Jules said, "Good night, sir," and faded through the door. Dyckman
tossed for a while. Then he got up in a rage at his insomnia. He
could not find his other slipper, and he stubbed his toe plebeianly
against an aristocratic table. He cursed and limped to the window
and glowered down into the street. He might have been a jailbird
gaping through iron bars. He could not get out of himself, or his
love for Charity.

He wondered how he could live till morning without her. He went to
his telephone to call her and hear her voice. He lifted the receiver
and when Central answered, the cowardice of decency compelled him
from his resolve, and he shamefully mumbled:

"The correct time, please."

What difference did it make to him what hour it was? He was the
victim of eternity, not time.

He went back to his window-vigil over nothing and fell asleep
murmuring the biggest swear words he could remember. In his weak
mood they had the effect of a spanked boy's last whimpers.

He was a boy, and fate was spanking him hard. He could not have whom
he wanted, and he resolved that there was nothing else in the world
to want. And all the time there was a girl sleeping out in Crotona
Park on the ground. She was pretty and dangerous, another flower
tossing on the girl-tree.




CHAPTER XIII

When the daylight whitened the black air it found Dyckman sprawled
along his window-lounge and woke him to the disgust of another
morning. He had to reach up and draw a curtain between his eyes
and the hateful sun.

But Kedzie had only her vigilant arm. It slipped down across her
brow like a watchful nurse coming in on tiptoe to protect a fretful
patient from broken sleep.

Kedzie slept on and on, till at length the section of Crotona Park
immediately beneath her refused to adapt itself longer to her
squirming search for soft spots. She sat up in startled confusion
at the unfamiliar ceiling. The wall-paper was not at all what she
always woke to. At first she guessed that she must have fallen out
of bed with a vengeance. Then she decided she had fallen out of doors
and windows as well, and into the front yard.

No, these bushes were not those bushes. That beech almost overhead,
seen from below by sleep-thick eyes, was an amazing thing.

She had drowsy childhood memories of being carried up-stairs by her
father and put to bed by her mother. Once or twice she had wakened
with her head to the footboard and endured agonies of confusion
before she got the universe turned round right. But how had she got
outdoors? Her father had never carried her down-stairs and left her
in the yard before.

At last she saw that she had fallen not merely out of bed and out of
doors, but out of town. She remembered her wanderings and her lying
down to sleep. She wondered who had taken her hat off for her.

She looked about for somebody to ask questions of. There was nobody
to be seen. There were a few housetops peering over the horizon
at her.

English sparrows were jumping here and there, engaged in their
everlasting spats, but she could not ask them.

Kedzie sat up straight, her arms back of her, her feet erect on
their heels at a distance, like suspicious squirrels. She yawned
against the back of her wrist and began to remember her escapade.
She gurgled with laughter, but she felt rumpled and lame, and not
in the least like Miss Anita Adair. She almost wished she were at
home, gazing from her bed to the washstand and hearing her mother
puttering about in the kitchen making breakfast; to Kedzie's young
heart it was the superlative human luxury to know you ought to get
up and not get up.

She clambered to her feet and made what toilet she could while
her seclusion lasted. She shook out her skirts like feathers,
and shoved her disheveled hair up under her hat as she had always
swept the dust under the rug.

She was overjoyed to find that her hand-bag had not been stolen.
The powder-puff would serve temporarily for a wash-basin. The small
change in her purse would postpone starvation or surrender for
a while.

She walked out of her sleeping-porch to the path. A few people were
visible now--workmen and workwomen taking a short-cut, and leisurely
gentlemen out of a job already beginning their day's work of holding
down benches. No one asked any questions or showed any interest
in Kedzie.

She found a street-car line, made sure that the car she took was
bound down-town, and resumed her effort to recapture New York.

Nearly everybody was reading one morning paper or another, but Kedzie
was not interested in the news. One man kept brushing her nose with
his paper. She was angry at his absence of mind, but she did not
notice that her nose was being annoyed by her own name in the
head-lines.

She rode and rode and rode till her hunger distracted her. She passed
restaurant after restaurant, till at last she could stand the famine
no longer. She got down from the car and walked till she came to
a bakery lunch-room entitled, "The Bon-Ton Bakery by Joe Gidden." It
was another like the one she ate in the day before. The same kind of
waiter was there, a dish-thrower with the manners of a hostler.

But Kedzie was so meek after her night on the ground that she was
flattered by his grin. "Skip" Magruder was his title, as she learned
in time. The "Skip" came to him from a curious impediment in his gait
that caused him to drop a stitch now and then.

Not long afterward Kedzie was so far beyond this poor hamstrung
stable-soul that she could not hear the word _skip_ without
blushing as if it were an indecency. It was an indecency, too, that
such a little Aphrodite should be reduced to a love-affair with such
a dismal Vulcan. But if it could happen on Olympus, it could happen
on earth.

Proximity is said to breed love, but priority has its virtues no less.
Skip Magruder was the first New-Yorker to help Kedzie in her hour
of dismay, and she thought him a great and powerful being profoundly
informed about the city of her dreams.

Skip did know a thing or two--possibly three. He was a New-Yorker
of a sort, and he had his New York as well as Jim Dyckman had his
or Peter Cheever his. He sized Kedzie up for the ignoramus she was,
but he was good to her in so far as his skippy faculties permitted.
He dropped the paper he was reading when she wandered in, and won
her at once by not calling her "Cutie."

"W'at 'll y'ave, lady?" he said as he skirled a plate and a glass of
ice-water along the oil-cloth with exquisite skill, slapped a knife
and fork and spoon alongside, and flipped her a check to be punched
as she ordered, and a fly-frequented bill of fare to order from.

Kedzie was stumped by the array of dishes. Skip volunteered his aid
--suggested "A nor'nge, ham 'n'eggs, a plate o' wheats, anna cuppa
corfee."

"All right," said Kedzie, wondering how much such a barbecue
would cost.

Skip went to bellow the order through a sliding door and grab it when
it should be pushed forth from a mysterious realm. Kedzie picked up
a newspaper that Skip had picked up after some early client left it.

Kedzie glanced at the front page and saw that the Germans had taken
three towns and the Allies one trench. She could not pronounce
the towns, and trenches meant nothing in her life. She was about to
toss the paper aside when a head-line caught her eye. She read with
pardonable astonishment:

SPANKED GIRL GONE

Beautiful Kedzie Thropp, Western Society Belle, Deserts Her Wealthy
Parents at Biltmore and Vanishes

POLICE OF NATION IN SEARCH

Kedzie felt the world blow up about her. Her name was in the New York
papers the second morning of her first visit! Her father and mother
were called wealthy! She was a society belle! Who could ever hereafter
deny these ideal splendors, now that there had been a piece in the
paper about them?

But dog on it! Why did they have to go and do such a thing as put
in about her being spanked? She blushed all over with rage. She had
once planned to go back home with wondrous gossip of her visit to
the big city. She had seen herself gloating over the other girls
who had never been to a big city.

Now they would all give her the laugh. The boys would make up rhymes
and yell them at her from a safe distance. She could kill her father
for being so mean to her. It was bad enough to hurt her as he did,
but to go and tattle when her back was turned was simply awful. She
could never go home now. She'd rather die.

Yet the paper said the police of the nation were searching for her.
She understood how Eliza felt with the bloodhounds after her. She
must keep out of sight of the police. One good thing was the picture
of her that they printed in the paper. It was not her picture at all,
and nothing like her. Besides, she had selected a new name. "Anita
Adair" was a fine disguise. It sounded awful swell, too. It sounded
like her folks had money. She was glad to be rid of "Kedzie Thropp."
She would never be Kedzie Thropp again.

Then the waiter came with her breakfast. It smelled so grand that
she forgot to be afraid for a while. The coffee smoked aroma; the
ham and eggs were fragrant; and the orange sent up a golden fume
of delight.

Skip entered into conversation as she entered into the orange.
"Where you woikin' now?" he said.

Kedzie did not know what his dialect meant at first. When she learned
that "woikin'" was the same as "wurrkin"' she confessed that she
had no job. She trembled lest he should recognize her from the paper.
He eyed her narrowly and tried to flirt with her across the very
head-lines that told who she was.

She could not be sure that he did not know her. He might be
a detective in disguise looking for a reward.

Skip had been reading about Kedzie when she came in. But he
never dreamed that she was she. He befriended her, however, out
of the goodness of his heart and the desire to retain her in
the neighborhood--also out of respect for the good old brass rule,
"Do good unto others now, so that they will do good to you later."

Slap told Kedzie that he knew a place right near where a goil was
wanted. When he told her that it was a candy-store she was elated.
A candy-store was her idea of a good place to work.

Skip told Kedzie where to go and what to say, and to mention that
Skip sent her.

Skip also recommended lodgings next his own in the flat of Mr. and
Mrs. Rietzvoller, delicatessen merchants.

"Nice rooms reasonable," he said, "and I'll be near to look after
you."

"You're awful fresh, seems to me, on short acquaintance," was
Kedzie's stinging rebuke.

Skip laughed. "Didn't you see the special-delivery stamp on
me forehead? But I guess you're a goil can take care yourself."

Kedzie guessed she was. But she was in need of help. Where else
could she turn? Whom else had she for a beau in this multitude
of strangers? So she laughed encouragingly.

"All right. You're elected. Gimme the address."

Skip wrote it on one of the business cards of the bakery. He added:

"Another thing: I know a good expressman will rustle your trunk
over from--Where you boardin' at now?"

Kedzie flushed. She could hardly tell him that she had boarded
in a park up-town somewhere.

Skip saw that she was confused. He showed exquisite tact.

"I'm wise, goilie. She's holdin' your trunk out on you. I been
in the same boat m'self."

Kedzie was willing to let it go at that, but Skip pondered:

"But, say--that ain't goin' to make such a hell of a hit--scuse me,
lady--but I mean if you tell your new landlady about your trunk
bein' left on your old one, that ain't goin' to get you nothin' but
the door-slam in the snoot.... I tell you: tell her you just come
in on the train and your wardrobe-trunk is on the way unless it
got delayed in changin' cars at--oh, any old place. I guess you did
come in, at that, from Buffalo or Pittsboig or some them Western
joints, didn' you?"

Kedzie just looked at him. Her big eyes lied for her, and he
hastened to say:

"Well, scuse me nosin' in on your own business. Tell the landlady
what you want to, only tell her it was me sent you. That's as good
as a guarantee--that she'll have to wait for her money."

Kedzie laughed at his excruciating wit, but she was touched also
by his courtesy, and she told him he was awful kind and she was
terrible obliged.

That bowled him over. But when she rose with stateliness and,
reaching for her money, offered to pay, he had the presence of mind
to snarl, amiably:

"Ah, ferget it and beat it. This meal's on me, and wishing you many
happy returns of the same."

He certainly was one grand gentleman. The proprietor was away,
and Skip could afford to be generous.

Kedzie left him and found the landlady and got a home; and then she
found the store and got a job. For a time she was in Eden. The doleful
proprietor's doleful wife was usually down-cellar making ice-cream
while her husband was out in the kitchen cooking candy. Kedzie was
free to guzzle soda-water at her will. Her forefinger and thumb went
along the stacks of candy, dipping like a robin's beak. She was
forever licking her fingers and brushing marshmallow dust off her
chest. She usually had a large, square caramel outlined in one round
cheek.

But the ecstasy did not abide. Kedzie began to realize why Mr. and
Mrs. Fleissig were sad. Sweets were a sour business; the people who
came into the shop were mainly children who spent whole half-hours
choosing a cent's worth of burnt sugar, or young, foolish girls who
giggled into the soda bubbles, or housewives ordering ice-cream for
Sunday.

If a young man appeared it was always to buy a box of candy for
some other girl. It made Kedzie cynical to see him haggle and ponder,
trying to make the maximum hit with a minimum of ammunition. It made
her more distrustful to see young men trying to flirt with her while
they bought tributes of devotion to somebody else. But Kedzie also
found out that several of the neighborhood girls accepted candy
from several gentlemen simultaneously, and she drew many cynical
conclusions from the candy business.

Skip Magruder was attentive and took her out to moving pictures
when he was free. In return for the courtesy she took her meals at
"The Bon-Ton Bakery by Joe Gidden." Whenever he dared, Skip skipped
the change. He could always slip her an extra titbit.

On that account she had to be a little extra gracious to him when
he took her to the movies. Holding hands didn't hurt.

Not a week had gone before Skip had rivals. He caught Kedzie in
deceptions. She kept him guessing, and the poor fool suffered
the torments and thrills of jealousy. A flip young fellow named Hoke,
agent for a jobber in ice-cream cones, and a tubby old codger named
Kalteyer, who facetiously claimed to own a chewing-gum mine, were
added competitors for Kedzie's smiles, while Skip teetered between
homicide and suicide.

Skip was wretched, and Kedzie was enthralled by her own success.
She had conquered New York. She had a job in a candy-store, a room
in a flat with the family of a delicatessen merchant; she had as
many flirtations as she could carry, and an increasing waiting-list.
What more could woman ask?

And all this was in far upper Third Avenue. She had not yet been
down to First Street. In fact, she was in New York two weeks before
she got as far south as 100th Street. She had almost forgotten that
she had ever dwelt elsewhere than in New York. Her imitative instinct
was already exchanging her Western burr for a New York purr.

Her father and mother would hardly have known her voice if they
had heard it. And they would hardly meet her, since they had
given her up and gone back home, far sadder, no wiser, much poorer.
They did not capture the insurance money, and they had no rewards
to offer for Kedzie.

Now and then a Kedzie would be reported in some part of the country,
and a wild paragraph would be printed about her. Now and then she
would be found dead in a river or would be traced as a white slave
drugged and sold and shipped to the Philippine Islands. The stories
were heinously cruel to her father and mother, who mourned her
in Nimrim and repented dismally of their harshness to the best
and pirtiest girl ever lived.

Meanwhile Kedzie sold candy and ate less and less of it. She began
to see more pretentious phases of city life and to be discontent
with her social triumph. She began to understand how cheap her lovers
were. She called them "mutts." She came to suffer agonies of remorse
at the liberties she had given them.

Mr. Kalteyer, the chewing-gum prince, in an effort to overcome
the handicap of weight and age which Mr. Hoke did not carry, told
Kedzie that her picture ought to be on every counter in the world,
and he could get it there. He'd love to see her presented as a classy
dame showing her ivories and proving how "beneficiary" his chewing-gum
was for the teeth as well as the digestion.

Kedzie told the delicatessen merchant's wife all about his glorious
promises, and she said, very sagely:

"Bevare vit dose bo'quet fellers. Better as so many roses is it
he should brink you a slice roastbif once. Lengwidge of flowers is
nice, but money is de svell talker. Take it by me, money is de svell
talker!"

Kedzie was glad of such wisdom, and she convinced Mr. Kalteyer
that it took more than conversation to buy her favor. He kept
his word under some duress, and took Kedzie to Mr. Eben E. Kiam,
a manufacturer of show-cards and lithographs, with an advertising
agency besides.

Mr. Edam studied her poses and smiles for days before he got
her at her best. An interested observer and a fertile suggester
in his office was a young Mr. Gilfoyle, who wrote legends for
show-cards, catch-lines for new wares, and poems, if pressed.

Gilfoyle had the poet's prophetic eye, and he murmured to Mr. Kiam
that there were millions in "Miss Adair's" face and form if they were
worked right. He took pains to let Kedzie overhear this. It pleased
her. Millions were something she decided she would like.

Gilfoyle developed wonderfully in the sun of Kedzie's interest. He
told Kalteyer that there was no money in handling chewing-gum in
a small way as a piker; what he wanted was a catchy name, a special
selling-argument, and a national publicity campaign. He advised
Kalteyer to borrow a lot of money at the banks and sling himself.

Kalteyer breathed hard. Gilfoyle was assailed by an epilepsy
of inspirations. In place of "Kalteyer's Peerless Gum," he proposed
the enthralling title, "Breathasweeta." Others had mixed pepsin
in their edible rubber goods of various flavors. Gilfoyle proposed
perfume!

Kalteyer was astounded at the boy's genius. He praised him till
Kedzie began to think him worth cultivation, especially as he proposed
to flood the country with portraits of Kedzie as the Breathasweeta
Girl.

The muse of advertising swooped down and whispered to Gilfoyle
the delicious lines to be printed under Kedzie's smile.

  Kiss me again. Who are you?
  You use Breathasweeta. You must be all right.

Kalteyer was swept off his feet. He ran to the bank while Kiam raised
Gilfoyle's salary.

The life-size card of Kedzie was made with a prop to hold it up. It
was so much retouched and altered in the printing that her own father,
seeing it in a Nimrim drugstore, never recognized it. Nearly every
drug-store in the country set up a Kedzie in its show-window.

The Breathasweeta came into such demand that Kalteyer was temporarily
bankrupted by prosperity. He had to borrow so much money to float
his wares that he had none for Kedzie's entertainment.

Mr. Kiam took her up as a valuable model for advertising purposes.

He aroused in Kedzie an inordinate appetite for pictures of herself.
All day long she was posed in costumes for various calendars, as
a farmer's daughter, as a society queen, as a camera girl, as
a sausage nymph, and as the patron saint of a brewery.

In a week she had arrived at classic poses in Greek robes. One by one
these were abbreviated, till Kedzie was being very generally revealed
to the public eye.

The modesty her mother had whipped into her was gradually unlearned
step by step, garment by garment, without Kedzie's noticing the change
in her soul.




CHAPTER XIV

Just about the hour of that historic day when Kedzie was running away
from her father and mother Prissy Atterbury was springing his great
story about Jim Dyckman and Charity.

Prissy had gone on to his destination, the home of the Winnsboros
in Greenwich, but he arrived late, and the house guests were too
profoundly absorbed in their games of auction to make a fit audience
for such a story. So Prissy saved it for a correct moment, though he
nearly burst with it. He slept ill that night from indigestion due
to retention of gossip.

The next forenoon he watched as the week-end prisoners dawdled down
from their gorgeous cells, to a living-room as big and as full
of seats as a hotel lobby. They threw themselves, on lounges and
huge chairs and every form of encouragement to indolence. They threw
themselves also on the mercy and the ingenuity of their hostess.
But Mrs. Winnsboro expected her guests to bring their own plans
and take care of themselves. They were marooned.

When the last malingerer arrived with yawns still unfinished, Prissy
seized upon a temporary hush and began to laugh. Pet Bettany, who was
always sullen before luncheon, grumbled:

"What ails you, Priss? Just seeing some joke you heard last night?"

Priss snapped, "I was thinking."

"You flatter yourself," said Pet. "But I suppose you've got to
get it off your chest. I'll be the goat. What is it?"

Prissy would have liked to punish the cat by not telling her a single
word of it, but he could not withhold the scandal another moment.

"Well, I'll tell you the oddest thing you ever heard in all
your life."

Pretending to tell it to Pet, he was reaching out with voice and eyes
to muster the rest. He longed for a megaphone and cursed such big
rooms.

"I was passing through the Grand Central to take my train up here,
you understand, and who should I see walk in from an incoming
express, you understand, but--who, I say, should I see but--oh,
you never would guess--you simply never would guess. Nev-vir-ir!"

"Who cares who you saw," said Pet, and viciously started to change
the subject, so that Prissy had to jump the prelude.

"It was Jim Dyckman. Well, in he comes from the train, you
understand, and looks about among the crowd of people waiting
for the train--to meet people, you understand."

Pet broke in, frantically: "Yes, I understand! But if you say
'understand' once more I'll scream and chew up the furniture!"

Prissy regarded her with patient pity and went on:

"Jim didn't see me, you un--you see--and--but just as I was about
to say hello to him he turns around and begins to stare into the
crowd of other people getting off the same train that he got off, you
underst--Well, I had plenty of time for my train, so I waited--not
to see what was up, you un--I do say it a lot, don't I? Well, I
waited, and who should come along but--well, this you never would
guess--not in a month of Sundays."

A couple of flanneled oaves impatient for the tennis-court stole
away, and Pet said,

"Speed it up, Priss; they're walking out on you."

"Well, they won't walk out when they know who the woman was. Jim
was waiting for--he was waiting for--"

He paused a moment. Nobody seemed interested, and so he hastened
to explode the name of the woman.

"Charity Coe! It was Charity Coe Jim was waiting for! They had come
in on the same train, you understand, and yet they didn't come up
the platform together. Why? I ask you. Why didn't they come up
the platform together? Why did Jim come along first and wait? Was
it to see if the coast was clear? Now, I ask you!"

There was respect enough paid to Prissy's narrative now. In fact,
the name of Charity in such a story made the blood of everybody
run cold--not unpleasantly--yet not altogether pleasantly.

Some of the guests scouted Prissy's theory. Mrs. Neff was there,
and she liked Charity. She puffed contempt and cigarette-smoke at
Atterbury, and murmured, sweetly, "Prissy, you're a dirty little
liar, and your long tongue ought to be cut out and nailed up on
a wall."

Prissy nearly wept at the injustice of such skepticism. It was Pet
Bettany, of all people, who came to his rescue with credulity. She
was sincerely convinced. A voluptuary and intrigante herself, she
believed that her own ideas of happiness and her own impulses were
shared by everybody, and that people who frowned on vice were either
hypocrites or cowards.

She could not imagine how small a part and how momentary a part evil
ambitions play in the lives of clean, busy souls like Charity. In
fact, Pet flattered herself as to her own wickedness, and pretended
to be worse than she was, in order to establish a reputation for
candor.

Vice has its hypocrisies as well as virtue.

Pet had long been impatient of the celebration of Charity Coe's
saintly attributes, and it had irked her to see so desirable
a catch as Jim Dyckman squandering his time on a woman who was
already married and liked it. He might have been interested in Pet
if Charity had let him alone.

Pet also was stirred with the detestation of sin in orderly people
that actuates disorderly people. She broke out with surprising
earnestness.

"Well, I thought as much! So Charity Coe is human, after all,
the sly devil! She's fooling even that foxy husband of hers. She's
playing the same game, too--and a sweet little foursome it makes."

She laughed so abominably that Mrs. Neff threw away her cigarette
and growled:

"Oh, shut up, Pet; you make me sick! Let's go out in the air."

Mrs. Neff was old enough to say such things, and Pet dampered
her noise a trifle. But she held Prissy back and made him recount
his adventure again. They had a good laugh over it--Prissy giggling
and hugging one knee, Pet whooping with that peasant mirth of hers.

The same night, at just about the hour when Kedzie Thropp was
falling asleep in Crotona Park and Jim Dyckman was sulking alone
in his home and Charity was brooding alone in hers, Prissy Atterbury
was delighted to see a party of raiders from another house-party
motor up to the Winnsboros' and demand a drink.

Prissy was a trifle glorious by this time. He had been frequenting
a bowl of punch subtly liquored, but too much sweetened. He leaned
heavily on a new-comer as he began his story. The new-comer pushed
Prissy aside with scant courtesy.

"Ah, tell us a new one!" he said. "That's ancient history!"

"What-what-what," Prissy stammered. "Who told you s'mush?"

"Pet Bet. telephoned it to us this morning. I heard it from three
other people to-day."

"Well, ain't that abslooshly abdominable."

Prissy began to cry softly. He knew the pangs of an author
circumvented by a plagiarist.

The next morning his head ached and he rang up an eye-opener or
two. The valet found him in violet pajamas, holding his jangling
head and moaning:

"There was too much sugar in the punch."

He remembered Pet's treachery, and he groaned that there was too much
vinegar in life. But he determined to fight for his story, and he did.
Long after Pet had turned her attention to other reputations, Prissy
was still peddling his yarn.

The story went circlewise outward and onward like the influence of
a pebble thrown into a pool. Two people who had heard the story and
doubted it met; one told it to the other; the other said she had
heard it before; and they parted mutually supported and definitely
convinced that the rumor was fact. Repetition is confirmation, and
history is made up of just such self-propelled lies--fact founded
on fiction.

We create for ourselves a Nero or a Cleopatra, a Washington or
a Molly Pitcher, from the gossip of enemies or friends or imaginers,
and we can be sure of only one thing--that we do not know the true
truth.

But we also do wrong to hold gossip in too much discredit. It gives
life fascination, makes the most stupid neighbors interesting. It
keeps up the love of the great art of fiction and the industry of
character-analysis. A small wonder that human beings are addicted
to it, when we are so emphatically assured that heaven itself is
devoted to it, and that we are under the incessant espionage of our
Deity, while the angels are eavesdroppers and reporters carrying
note-books in which they write with indelible ink the least things
we do or say or think.




CHAPTER XV

To see into other people's hearts and homes and lives is one of
the primeval instincts. In that curiosity all the sciences are
rooted; and it is a scientific impulse that makes us hanker to
get back of faces into brains, to push through words into thoughts,
and to ferret out of silences the emotions they smother.

Gossip is one of the great vibrations of the universe. Like rain,
it falls on the just and on the unjust; it ruins and it revives;
it quenches thirst; it makes the desert bloom with cactuses and
grotesque flowers, and it beats down violets and drowns little birds
in their nests.

Gossip was now awakening a new and fearful interest in Charity Coe
and Jim Dyckman.

Two women sitting at a hair-dresser's were discussing the gossip
according to Prissy through the shower of their tresses. The manicure
working on the nails of one of them glanced up at the coiffeur and
gasped with her eyes. The manicure whispered it to her next customer
--who told it to her husband in the presence of their baby. The baby
was not interested, but the nurse was, and when she rode out with
the baby she told the chauffeur. The chauffeur used the story as
a weapon of scorn to tease Jim Dyckman's new valet with. Jules would
have gone into a frenzy of denial, but Jules was by now wearing the
livery of his country in the trenches. The new valet--Dallam was
his name--tried to sell the story to a scavenger-editor who did not
dare print it yet, though he put it in the safe where he kept such
material against the day of need. Also he paid Dallam a retainer
to keep him in touch with the comings and goings of Dyckman.

And thus the good name of a good woman went through the mud like
a white flounce torn and dragged and unnoticed. For of course
Charity never dreamed that any one was giving such importance to
the coincidence of her railroad journey with Jim Dyckman.

No more did Dyckman. He knew all too well what gulfs had parted
him from Charity even while he sat with her in the train. He had
suffered such rebuffs from her that he was bitterly aggrieved. He
was telling himself that he hated Charity for her stinginess of
soul at the very time that the whispers were damning her too great
generosity in his favor.

While gossip was recruiting its silent armies against her for her
treason to her husband, Charity was wondering why her loyalty to
him was so ill paid. She did not suspect Cheever of treason to her.
That was so odious that she simply could not give it thought room.

She stumbled on a newspaper article, the same perennial essay in
recurrence, to the effect that many wives lose their husbands by
neglect of their own charms. It was full of advice as to the tricks
by which a woman may lure her spouse back to the hearth and fasten
him there, combining domestic vaudeville with an interest in his
business, but relying above all on keeping Cupid's torch alight by
being Delilah every day.

Charity Coe was startled. She wondered if she were losing Cheever
by neglecting herself. She began to pay more heed to her dress
and her hats, her hair, her complexion, her smile, her general
attractiveness.

Cheever noticed the strange alteration, and it bewildered him. He
could not imagine why his wife was flirting with him. She made it
harder for him to get away to Zada, but far more eager to. He did
not like Charity at all, in that impersonation. Neither did Charity.
She hated herself after a day or two of wooing her official wooer.
"You ought to be arrested," she told her mirror-self.

There were plays and novels that counseled a neglected wife to show
an interest in another man. Charity was tempted to use Jim Dyckman
as a decoy for her own wild duck; but Dyckman had sailed away in
his new yacht, on a cruise with his yacht club.

The gossip did not die in his absence. It oozed along like a dark
stream of fly-gathering molasses. Eventually it came to the notice
of a woman who was Zada's dearest friend and hated her devotedly.

She told it to Zada as a taunt, to show her that Zada's Mr. Cheever
was as much deceived as deceiving. Zada, of course, was horribly
delighted. She promptly told Cheever that his precious wife had been
having a lovely affair with Jim Dyckman. Cheever showed her where
she stood by forbidding her to mention his wife's name. He told Zada
that, whatever his wife might be, she was good as gold.

He left Zada with great dignity and made up his mind to kill Jim
Dyckman. In his fury he was convinced of the high and holy and
cleanly necessity of murder. All of our basest deeds are always
done with the noblest motives. Cheever forgot his own wickednesses
in his mission to punish Dyckman. The assassination of Dyckman, he
was utterly certain, would have been what Browning called "a spittle
wiped from the beard of God."

But he was not permitted to carry out his mission, for he learned
that Dyckman was somewhere on the Atlantic, far beyond Cheever's
reach.

Disappointed bitterly at having to let him live awhile, Cheever
went to his home, to denounce his wife. He found her reading. She
was overjoyed to see him. He stared at her, trying to realize her
inconceivable depravity.

"Hello, honey!" she cried. "What's wrong? You've got a fever,
I'm sure. I'm going to take your temperature."

From her hospital experience she carried a little thermometer
in her hand-bag. She had it by her and rose to put it under his
tongue. He struck it from her, and she stared at him. He stood
quivering like an overdriven horse. He called her a name highly
proper in a kennel club, but inappropriate to the boudoir.

"You thought you'd get away with it, didn't you? You thought you'd
get away with it, didn't you?" he panted.

"Get away with what, honey?" she said, thinking him delirious. She
had seen a hundred men shrieking in wild frenzies from brains too
hot.

"You and Dyckman! humph!" he raged. "So you and Jim Dyckman sneaked
off to the mountains together, did you? And came back on the same
train, eh? And thought I'd never find it out. Why, you--"

What he would have said she did not wait to hear. She was human,
after all, and had thousands of plebeian and primitive ancestors
and ancestresses. They jumped into her muscles with instant instinct.
She slapped his face so hard that it rocked out of her view.

She stood and fumbled at her tingling palm, aghast at herself and
at the lightning-stroke from unknown distances that shattered her
whole being. Then she began to sob.

Peter Cheever's aching jaw dropped, and he gazed at her befuddled.
His illogical belief in her guilt was illogically converted to a
profound conviction of her innocence. The wanton whom he had accused
was metamorphosed into a slandered angel who would not, could not
sin. In his eyes she was hopelessly pure.

"Thank God!" he moaned. "Oh, thank God for one clean woman in
this dirty world!"

He caught her bruised hand and began to kiss it and pour tears on it.
And she looked down at his beautiful bent head and laid her other
hand on it in benison.

It is one way of reconciling families.

Cheever was so filled with remorse that he was tempted to write
Jim Dyckman a note of apology. That was one of the few temptations
he ever resisted.

Now he was going to kill everybody who had been dastard enough
to believe and spread the scandal he had so easily believed himself.
But he would have had to begin with Zada. He was afraid of Zada. He
enjoyed a few days of honeymoon with Charity.

He dodged Zada on the telephone, and he gave Mr. Hudspeth
instructions to say that he was always out in case of a call
from "Miss You Know."

"I know," Mr. Hudspeth answered.

One morning, at an incredibly early hour for Zada, she walked into
his office and asked Mr. Hudspeth to retire--also the suspiciously
good-looking stenographer. Then Zada said:

"Peterkin, it's time you came home."

His laugh was hard and sharp. She took out a little weapon. She had
managed to evade the Sullivan law against the purchase or possession
of weapons. Peter was nauseated. Zada was calm.

"Peterkin," she said, "did you read yesterday about that woman who
shot a man and then herself?"

Peter had read it several times recently--the same story with
different names. It had long been a fashionable thing: the disprized
lover murders the disprizing lover and then executes the murderer.
It was expensive to rugs and cheated lawyers and jurors out of fees,
but saved the State no end of money.

Cheever surrendered.

"I'll come home," he said, gulping the last quinine word. It seemed
to him the most loyal thing he could do at the moment. It would have
been unpardonably unkind to Charity to let himself be spattered all
over his office and the newspapers by a well-known like Zada.

Once "home" with Zada, he took the pistol away from her. But she
laughed and said:

"I can always buy another one, deary."

Thus Zada re-established her rights. Cheever was very sorry. He
cursed himself for being so easily led astray. He wondered why it
was his lot to be so fickle and incapable of loyalty. He did not
know. He could only accept himself as he was. Oneself is the most
wonderful, inexplicable thing in the world.

So Charity's brief honeymoon waned, blinked out again.

Jim Dyckman came home from the yacht cruise in blissless ignorance
of all this frustrated drama. He longed to see Charity, but dared
not. He took sudden hope from remembering her determination to go
back abroad to her nursery of wounded soldiers.

He had an inspiration. He would go abroad also--as a member of
the aviation, corps. He already owned a fairly good hydro-aeroplane
which had not killed him yet--he was a good swimmer, and lucky.

He ordered the best war-eagle that could be made, and began to take
lessons in military maps, bird's-eye views, and explosives. He was
almost happy. He would improve on the poet's dream-ideal, "Were I
a little bird, I'd fly to thee."

He would be a big bird, and he'd fly with his Thee. He would call on
Charity in France when they both had an evening off, and take her up
into the clouds for a sky-ride.

He had an ambition. At worst, he could die for France. It is splendid
to have something to die for. It makes life worth living.

He was so ecstatic in his first flight with his finished machine
that he fell and broke one of its wings, also one of his own. Charity
heard of his accident and called on him at his mother's house. He
told her his plans.

"Too bad!" she sighed. "I'm not going abroad. Besides, I couldn't see
you if I did."

Then she told him what Cheever had said, but not how she had slapped.
Jim was wild. He rose on his bad arm and fell back again, groaning:

"I'll kill him for that."

Everybody is always going to kill everybody. Sometimes somebody does
kill somebody. But Dyckman went over to the great majority. Charity
begged him not to kill her husband, and to please her he promised
not to.

Charity, having insured her husband's life, said: "And now, Jimmie
old boy, I mustn't see you any more. Gossip has linked our names. We
must unlink them. My husband and you will butcher each other if I'm
not careful, so it's good-by for keeps, and God bless you, isn't it?
Promise?"

"I'll promise anything, if you'll go on away and let me alone,"
Jim groaned, his broken arm being quite sufficient trouble for him
at the moment.

Charity laughed and went on away. She was deeply comforted by
a promise which she knew he would not keep.

Dyckman himself, as soon as his broken bones ceased to shake his soul,
groaned with loneliness and despaired of living without Charity--vowed
in his sick misery that nobody could ever come between them. He
could not, would not, live without her.

Still the gossip oozed along that he had not lived without her.




CHAPTER XVI

Kedzie had come to town with no social ambitions whatsoever beyond
a childish desire to be enormously rich and marry a beautiful prince.
Her ideal of heaven at first was an eternal movie show interrupted
at will by several meals a day, incessant soda-water and ice-cream
and a fellow or two to spoon with, and some up-to-date duds--most
of all, several pairs of those white-topped shoes all the girls
in town were wearing.

The time would shortly come when Kedzie would abhor the word
_swell_ and despise the people who used it, violently forgetting
that she had herself used it. She would soon be overheard saying
to a mixed girl of her mixed acquaintance: "Take it from me, chick,
when you find a dame calls herself a lady, she ain't. Nobody who
is it says it, and if you want to be right, lay off such words as
_swell_ and _classy_."

Later, she would be finding that it took something still more than
avoiding the word _lady_ to deserve it. She would writhe to
believe that she could never quite make herself exact with the term.
She would hate those who had been born and made to the title, and
she would revert at times to common instincts with fierce anarchy.

But one must go forward before one can backslide, and Kedzie was
on the way up the slippery hill.

She had greatly improved the quality of her lodgings, her suitors,
and her clothes. Her photographic successes in risky exposures had
brought her a marked increase of wages. She wore as many clothes
as she could in private, to make up for her self-denial before
the camera. Her taste in dress was soubrettish and flagrant, but
it was not small-town. She was beginning to dislike ice-cream soda
and candy and to call for beer and Welsh rabbit. She would soon
be liking salads with garlic and Roquefort cheese in the dressing.
She was mounting with splendid assiduity toward the cigarette and
the high-ball. There was no stopping Kedzie. She kept rising on
stepping-stones of her dead selves.

Landladies are ladder-rungs of progress, too; Kedzie's history
might have been traced by hers.

Her camera career had led her from the flat of the delicatessen
merchant, through various shabby lairs, into the pension of a
vaudeville favorite of prehistoric fame. The house was dilapidated,
and the brownstone front had the moth-eaten look of the plush
furniture within.

Mrs. Jambers was as fat as if she fed on her own boarders, but she
was once no less a person than Mrs. Trixie Jambers Coogan, of Coogan
and Jambers. She had once evoked wild applause at Tony Pastor's by
her clog-dancing.

There was another dancer there, an old grenadier of a woman who
had been famous in her time as a _premiere danseuse_ at
the opera. Mrs. Bottger had spent a large part of her early life
on one toe, but now she could hardly balance herself sitting down.
She held on to the table while she ate. She did not look as if
she needed to eat any more.

Kedzie was proud to know people who had been as famous as these two
said they had been, but Bottger and Jambers used to fight bitterly
over their respective schools of expression. Bottger insisted that
the buck-and-wing and the double shuffle and other forms of jiggery
were low. Jambers insisted that the ballet was immoral and, what
was more, insincere. Mrs. Bottger was furious at the latter charge,
but the former was now rather flattering. She used secretly to take
out old photographs of herself as a slim young thing in tights with
one toe for support and the other resting on one knee. She would
gloat over these as a miser over his gold; and she would shake her
finger at her quondam self and scold it lovingly--"You wicked little
thing, you!" Then she would hastily move it out of the reach of her
tears. It was safe under the eaves of her bosom against her heart.

It was a merry war, with dishonors even, till a new-comer appeared,
a Miss Eleanor Silsby, who taught the ultimate word in dancing; she
admitted it herself. As she explained it, she went back to nature
for her inspiration. Her pupils dressed as near to what nature
had provided them with as they really dared. Miss Silsby said that
they were trying to catch the spirit of wind and waves and trees
and flowers, and translate it into the dance. They translated
seaweed and whitecaps and clouds into steps. Miss Silsby was booking
a few vaudeville dates "in order to bring the art of nature back
to the people and bring the people back to the art of nature." What
the people would do with it she did not explain--nor what the police
would do to them if they tried it.

Miss Silsby had by the use of the most high-sounding phrases
attained about the final word in candor. What clothes her pupils
wore were transparent and flighty. The only way to reveal more skin
would have been to grow it. Her pupils were much photographed in
airy attitudes on beaches, dancing with the high knee-action so much
prized in horses; flinging themselves into the air; curveting, with
the accent on the curve; clasping one another in groups of nymphish
innocence and artificial grace. It was all, somehow, so shocking for
its insincerity that its next to nudity was a minor consideration.
It was so full of affectation that it seemed quite lacking in the
dangers of passion.

So gradually indeed had the mania for disrobing spread about
the world that there was little or no shock to be had. People
generally assumed to be respectable took their children to see
the dances, even permitted them to learn them. According to Miss
Silsby's press-notices, "Members of wealthy and prominent families
are taking up the new art." And perhaps they were doing as well by
their children as more careful parents, since nothing is decent or
indecent except by acclamation, and if nudity is made commonplace,
there is one multitude of temptations removed from our curiosity.

But Bottger, whose ballet-tights and tulle skirt were once the
horror of all good people--Bottger was disgusted with the dances
of Miss Silsby, and said so.

Miss Silsby was merely amused by Bottger's hostility. She scorned
her scorn, and with the utmost scientific and ethnological support
declared that clothes were immoral in origin, and the cause
of immorality and extravagance, since they were not the human
integument. Jambers was not quite sure what "integument" was,
but she thanked God she had never had it in her family.

An interested onlooker and in-listener at these boarding-house battles
was Kedzie. By now she was weary of her present occupation--of course!
She was tired of photographs of herself, especially as they were
secured at the cost of long hours of posing under the hot skylight
of a photograph gallery. Miss Silsby gave Kedzie a pair of
complimentary seats to an entertainment at which the Silsby sirens
were to dance. Kedzie was swept away with envy of the hilarity,
the grace, the wild animal effervescence and elegance of motion.

She contrasted the vivacity of the dancer's existence with the
stupidity of her still-life poses. She longed to run and pirouette
and leap into the air. She wished she could kick herself in the back
of the head to music the way the Silsby girls did.

When she told this to Miss Silsby the next day Miss Silsby was
politely indifferent. Kedzie added:

"You know, I'm up on that classic stuff, too. Oh, yessum, Greek
costumes are just everyday duds to me."

"Indeed!" Miss Silsby exclaimed.

Kedzie showed her some trade photographs of herself as an Athenienne,
and Miss Silsby pondered. Although her dances were supposed to purify
and sweeten the soul, one of her darlings had so fiendish a temper
that she had torn out several Psyche knots. She was the demurest of
all in seeming when she danced, but she was uncontrollably jealous.

Miss Silsby saw that Kedzie's pout had commercial value. She
invited Kedzie to join her troupe. And Kedzie did. The wages were
small, but the world was new. She became one of the most attractive
of the dancers. But once more the rehearsals and the long hours
of idleness wore out her enthusiasm. She hated the regularity
of the performances; every afternoon and evening she must express
raptures she did not feel, by means of laborious jumpings and
runnings to the same music. And she abominated the requirement
to keep kicking herself in the back of the head.

Even the thrill of clotheslessness became stupid. It was disgusting
not to have beautiful gowns to dance in. Zada L'Etoile and others had
a new costume for every dance. Kedzie had one tiresome hip-length
shift and little else. As usual, poor Kedzie found that realization
was for her the parody of anticipation.

Kedzie's new art danced into her life a few new suitors, but they
came at a time when she was almost imbecile over Thomas Gilfoyle, the
advertising bard. He was the first intellectual man she had met--that
is, he was intellectual compared with any other of her men friends.
He could read and write something besides business literature.
In fact, he was a fellow of startling ideas. He called himself
a socialist. What the socialists would have called him it would be
hard to say; they are given to strong language.

Kedzie had known in Nimrim what church socials were, for they were
about the height of Nimrim excitement. But young Mr. Gilfoyle was not
a church socialist. He detested all creeds and all churches and said
things about them and about religion that at first made Kedzie look
up at the ceiling and dodge. But no brimstone ever broke through
the plaster and she grew used to his diatribes.

She had never met one of these familiar enough figures before, and
she was vaguely stirred by his chantings in behalf of humanity. He
adored the poor laborers, though he did not treat the office-boy well
and he was not gallant to the scrub-woman. But his theories were as
beautiful as music, and he intoned them with ringing oratory. Kedzie
did not know what he was talking about, any more than she knew what
Caruso was singing about when she turned him on in Mrs. Jambers's
phonograph, but his melodies put her heart to its paces, and so did
Gilfoyle's.

Gilfoyle wrote her poems, too, real poems not meant for publication
at advertising rates. Kedzie had never had anybody commit poetry
at her before. It lifted her like that Biltmore elevator and sent
her heart up into her head. He lauded Kedzie's pout as well as her
more saltant expressions. He voiced a belief that life in a little
hut with her would be luxury beyond the contemptible stupidities
of life in a palace with another. Kedzie did not care for the hut
detail, but the idolatry of so "brainy" a man was inspiring.

Kedzie and Gilfoyle were mutually afraid: she of his intellect, he
of her beauty and of her very fragility. Of course, he called her
by her new name, "Miss Adair." Later he implored the priceless joy
of calling her by her first name.

Gilfoyle feared to ask this privilege in prose, and so he put it
in verse. Kedzie found it in her mail at the stage door. She huddled
in a corner of the big undressing-room where the nymphs prepared for
their task. The young rowdies kept peeking over her shoulder and
snatching at her letter, but when finally she read it aloud to them
as a punishment and a triumph, they were stricken with awe. It ran
thus:

  Pretty maid, pretty maid, may I call you "Anita"?
  Your last name is sweet, but your first name is sweeter.

Kedzie stumbled over this, because she had not yet eradicated
the Western final "r" from her pronunciation. She thought Mr.
Gilfoyle was awful swell because he dropped it naturally. But she
read on, scrambling over some of the words the way a horse jumps
a fence one rail too high.

  You are so adorable
  I find it deplorable,
      Absurd and abnormal.
      To cling to the formal
  'Twere such a good omen
  To drop the cognomen.
      So I beg you to promise
      That you'll call me "Thomas,"
  Or better yet, "Tommie,"
  Instead of th' abomi-
      Nable "Mr. Gilfoyle."
      You can, and you will foil
  My torments Mephistian
  By using my Christian
      Name and permitting Yours Truly
      To call you yours too-ly.

  Miss Adair,
  Hear my prayer
  Do I dare
      Call my love when I meet her
      "Anita"? Anita! Anita!!

In the silence that followed she whisked out a box of shrimp-pink
letter-paper she had bought at a drugstore. It was daintily ruled
in violet lines and had a mauve "A" at the top. It was called
"The Nobby Note," and so she knew that it was all right.

She wrote on it the simple but thrilling answer:

DEAR TOMMIE,--You bet your boots!
      ANITA.

By the time she had sealed and addressed the shrimpy envelope and
begun feverishly to make up for lost time in changing her costume,
the other girls had recovered a little from the suffocation of her
glory. One of them murmured:

"Say, Aneet, what is your first name? Your really truly one."

Another snarled, "What's your really truly last name?"

A third dryad whooped, "I bet it's Lizzie Smoots or Mag Wimpfhauser."

The others had other suggestions to howl, and Anita cowered in
silence, wondering if one of the fiends would not at any moment
guess "Kedzie Thropp."

The call to arms and legs cut short her torment, and for once
the music seemed appropriate. Never had she danced with such
lyricism.

Gilfoyle had the presence of mind to be waiting in the alley after
the matinee, and took from her hand the note she was carrying to
the mail-box. When he read it he almost embraced her right there.

They took a street-car to Mrs. Jambers's boarding-house, but cruel
disappointment waited for them. Another boarder was entertaining
her gentleman friend in the parlor. Kedzie was furious. So was
the other boarder.

That night Gilfoyle met Kedzie again at the stage door, but they
could not go to the boarding-house, for Mrs. Jambers occupied at
that time a kind of false mantelpiece that turned out to be a bed
in disguise. So they went to the Park.

Young Gilfoyle treated Kedzie with almost more respect than she
might have desired. He was one of those self-chaperoning young men
who spout anarchy and practise asceticism. Even in his poetry it
was the necessitous limitations of rhyme-words that dragged him
into his boldest thoughts.

Sitting on a dark Park bench with Kedzie, he could not have been
more circumspect if there had been sixteen duennas gathered around.
The first time he hugged her was a rainy night when Kedzie had to
snuggle close and haul his arm around her, and then his heart beat
so fast against her shoulder that she was afraid he would die of it.

Cool, wet, windy nights in late summer feel very cold, and a damp
bench under dripping trees was a nuisance to a tired dancing-girl.
Love was so inconvenient that when Kedzie bewailed the restrictions
imposed on unmarried people Gilfoyle proposed marriage. It popped
out of him so suddenly that Kedzie felt his heart stop and listen.
Then it began to race, and hers ran away, too.

"Why, Mr. Gilfoyle! Why, Tommie!" she gurgled. It was her first
proposal of marriage, and she lost her head. "And you a socialist
and telling me you didn't believe in marriages!"

"I don't," said Gilfoyle, with lovely sublimity above petty
consistencies, "except with you, Anita. I don't believe in anything
exclusive for anybody except you for me and me for you. We've just
got to be each other's own, haven't we?"

Kedzie could think of nothing to add except a little emphasis; so
she cried, "Each other's very ownest own!"

Thus they became engaged. That made it possible for her to have him
in her own room at the boarding-house. Also it enabled him to borrow
money from her with propriety when they were hungry for supper.
Fortunately, he did not mind her going on working. Not at all.

Gilfoyle was a fiend of jealousy concerning individuals, but he was
not jealous of the public. It did not hurt him at all to have Kedzie
publishing her structural design to the public, because he loved
the public, and the public paid indirectly. He wanted the masses
to have what the classes have. That delighted Kedzie, at first.

What she thought she understood of his socialistic scheme was that
every poor girl like herself was going to have her limousine and
her maid and a couple of footmen. She did not pause to figure out
how complicated that would be, since the maid would have to have
her maid, and that maid hers, and so on, _ad infinitum, ad
absurdum._

Later Kedzie found that Gilfoyle's first intention was to impoverish
the rich, elimousinate their wives, and put an end to luxury. It
astonished her how furious he got when he read of a ball given by
people of wealth, though a Bohemian dance at Webster Hall pleased
him very much, even though some of the costumes made Kedzie's Greek
vest look prudish.

But all this Kedzie was to find out after she had married the wretch.
One finds out so many things when one marries one. It is like going
behind the scenes at a performance of "Romeo and Juliet," seeing
the stage-braces that prop the canvas palaces, and hearing Juliet
bawl out Romeo for crabbing her big scene. The shock is apt to be
fatal to romance unless one is prepared for it in advance as
an inevitable and natural conflict.




CHAPTER XVII

Kedzie and Tommie enjoyed a cozy betrothal. He was busy at his shop,
and she was busy at hers. They did not see much of each other, and
that made for the prosperity of their love. They talked a great deal
of marriage, but it seemed expedient to wait till one or the other
acquired a raise of wage. The Silsby dancers were playing at cut
salaries in accord with the summer schedules, and business was very
light at the advertising agency.

The last week the troupe was playing at the Bronx Opera House, and
there Skip Magruder chanced to see her--to see more of her than he
had ever expected to on the hither side of matrimony.

His old love came back with a tidal rush, and he sent her a note
written with care in a barroom--or so Kedzie judged from the beery
fragrance of it. It said:

DEAR ANITA,--Was considerable supprise to see you to-night as didn't
know you was working in vawdvul and as I have been very loansome
for you thought would ask you would you care to take supper after
show with your loveing admirror and friend will wait for anser at
stage door hopping to see you for Old Lang's Sign.

PATRICK X. MAGRUDER--"SKIP."

Kedzie did not read this letter to the gang of nymphs. She blushed
bitterly and mumbled, "Well, of all the nerve!" After some hesitation
she wrote on Skip's note the "scatting" words, _"Nothing doing"_
and sent it back by the dismal stage doorkeeper.

She had hoped Skip would have the decency to go away and die quietly
and not hang round to see her leave with Mr. Gilfoyle. Skip had
a hitch in one leg, but Mr. Gilfoyle had a touch of writer's cramp,
and Kedzie had no desire to see the result of a conflict between two
such victims of unpreparedness.

She forgot both rivals in the excitement of a sudden incursion
of Miss Silsby, who came crying:

"Oh, girls, girls, what Do you sup-Pose has Happened? I have been
en-Gaged to give my dances at Noxon's--old Mrs. Noxon's, in Newport."

Miss Silsby always used the first person singular, though she never
danced; and if she had, in the costume of her charges, the effect
would have been a fatal satire.

By now Kedzie was familiar enough with names of great places
to realize the accolade. To be recognized by the Noxons was to
be patented by royalty. And Newport was Mecca.

The pilgrimage thither was a voyage of discovery with all
an explorer's zest. Her first view of the city disappointed her,
but her education had progressed so far that she was able to call
the pleasant, crooked streets of the older towns "picturesque."
A person who is able to murmur "How picturesque!" has made progress
in snobbical education. Kedzie murmured, "How picturesque!" when
she saw the humbler portions of Newport.

But there was a poignant sincerity in her admiration of the homes
of the rich. Bad taste with ostentation moved her as deeply as true
stateliness. Her heart made outcry for experience of opulence. She
now despised the palaces of New York because they had no yards.
Newport houses had parks. Newport was the next candy-shop she wanted
to work in.

The splendor of the visit was dimmed for her, however, when she
learned that she would not be permitted to swim at Bailey's Beach.
Immediately she felt that swimming anywhere else was contemptible.

Still, she was seeing Newport, and she could not tell what swagger
fate might now be within reach of her hands--or her feet, rather--for
Kedzie was gaining her golden apples not by clutching at them, but by
kicking them off the tree of opportunity with her carefully manicured
little toes.

Also she said "swagger" now instead of "classy" or "swell." Also she
forgot to telegraph Tommie Gilfoyle, as she promised, of her safe
arrival. Also she was too busy to write to him that first night.




CHAPTER XVIII

When Prissy Atterbury started the gossip rolling that he had seen
Jim Dyckman enter the Grand Central Terminal alone and wait for
Charity Coe Cheever to come from the same train it did not take
long for the story to roll on to Newport. By then it was a pretty
definite testimony of guilt in a vile intrigue. When Mrs. Noxon
announced her charity circus people wondered if even she would dare
include Mrs. Cheever on her bead-roll. The afternoon was for guests;
the evening was for the public at five dollars a head.

One old crony of Charity's, a Mrs. Platen, revived the story for
Mrs. Noxon at the time when she was editing the list of invitations
for the afternoon. Mrs. Noxon seemed to be properly shocked.

"Of course, you'll not invite her now," said Mrs. Platen.

"Not invite her!" Mrs. Noxon snorted. "I'll invite her twice. In
the first place, I don't believe it of Charity Coe. I knew her mother.
In the second, if it's true, what of it? Charity Coe has done so much
good that she has a right to do no end of bad to balance her books."

To emphasize her support, Mrs. Noxon insisted on Charity Coe's coming
to her as a house-guest for a week before the fete. This got into all
the papers and redeemed Charity's good name amazingly. Perhaps Jim
Dyckman saw it in the papers. At least he and his yacht drifted into
the harbor the day of the affair. Of course he had an invitation.

The Noxon affair was the usual thing, only a little more so. People
dressed themselves as costlily as they could, for hours beforehand
--then spent a half-hour or more fuming in a carriage-and-motor
tangle waiting to arrive at the entrance, while the heat sweat all
the starch out of themselves and their clothes.

A constant flood poured in upon Mrs. Noxon, or tried to find her
at the receiving-post. She was usually not there. She was like
a general running a big battle. She had to gallop to odd spots
now and then.

The tradition of her selectness received a severe strain in the
presence of such hordes of guests. They trod on one another's toes,
tripped on one another's parasols, beg-pardoned with ill-restrained
wrath, failed to get near enough to see the sights, stood on tiptoe
or bent down to peer through elbows like children outside a
ball-park.

The entertainment was vaudeville disguised by expense. It was not
easy to hold the attention of those surfeited eyes and ears. Actors
and actresses of note almost perished with wrath and humiliation
at the indifference to their arts. Loud laughter from the back rows
broke in at the wrong time, and appalling silences greeted the times
to laugh.

The fame, or notoriety, of the Silsby dancers attracted a part of
the throng to the marble swimming-pool and the terraced fountain
with its deluged statuary. Jim Dyckman and Charity Coe suddenly
found themselves together. They hated it, but they could not easily
escape. Jim felt that all eyes were bulging out at them. He had
murder in his heart.

There was the usual delay, the frank impatience and leg-fag of people
unused to standing about except at receptions and dressmakers'.
Finally the snobbish string-orchestra from Boston, which played only
the most exclusive music, began to tune up, and at length, after much
mysterious wigwagging of signals to play, it played a hunting-piece.

Suddenly from the foliage came what was supposed to be a startled
nymph. The spectators were startled, too, for a moment, for her
costume was amazing. Even on Bailey's Beach it would have attracted
attention.

Kedzie was the nymph. She was making her debut into great society.
What would her mother have said if she could have seen her there?
Her father would have said nothing. He would have fainted
unobtrusively, for the first time in his life.

Kedzie was scared. She had stage-fright of all these great people
so overdressed when she was not even underclothed.

"Poor little thing!" said Charity, and began to applaud to cheer her
up. She nudged Jim. "Come on, help her out. Isn't she beautiful?"

"Is she?" said Jim, applauding.

It did not seem right to praise one woman's beauty to another. It
was like praising one author's work to another, or praising another
preacher's sermon to a preacher's face.

Still, Jim had to admit that Kedzie was pretty. Suddenly he wanted
to torment Charity, and so he exclaimed:

"You're right, she is a little corker, a very pleasant dream!" Anger
at Charity snatched away the blindfold which is another name for
fidelity. Scales fell from his eyes, and he saw truth in nakedness.
He saw beauty everywhere. All about him were beautiful women in rich
costume. He saw that beauty is not a matter of opinion, a decision
of love's, but a happening to be regular or curvilinear or warm of
color or hospitable in expression.

Particularly he saw the beauty of Kedzie. There was more of her
to see than of those other women behind their screens of silk and
lace and linen. His infatuation for Charity Coe had befuddled him,
wrapped him in a fog through which all other women passed like
swaddled figures. He felt free now.

Over Charity's shoulder and through the spray of the goura on
her hat he saw Kedzie sharp and stark, her suavities of line and
the milk-smooth fabric of her envelope. He studied Kedzie with
emancipation, not seeing Charity at all any more--nor she him.

For Charity studied Kedzie, too. She felt academically the delight
of the girl's beauty, a statue coming to life, or a living being
going back into statue--Galatea in one phase or the other. She felt
the delight of the girl's successful drawing. She smiled to behold
it. Then her smile drooped, for the words of the old song came back
crooning the ancient regret:

  How small a part of time they share--

There was elegy now in Kedzie's graces. Youth was of their essence,
and youth shakes off like the dust on the moth's wing. Youth is gone
at a touch.

In her sorrow she turned to look up at Jim. She was shocked to
see how attentively he regarded Kedzie. He startled her by the
fascination in his mien. She looked again at Kedzie.

Somehow the girl immediately grew ugly--or what beauty she had was
that of a poisonous snake. And she looked common, too. Who else but
a common creature would come out on a lawn thus unclothed for a few
dollars?

She looked again at Jim Dyckman, and he was not what he had been. He
was as changed as the visions in Lewis Carroll's poem. She saw that
he had his common streak, too: he was mere man, animal, temptable.
But she forgave him. Curiously, he grew more valuable since she felt
that she was losing him.

There was an impatient shaking at her breast. In anybody else she
would have called it jealousy. This astounded her, made her afraid
of herself and of him. What right had she to be jealous of anybody
but Peter Cheever? She felt that she was more indecent than Kedzie.
She bowed her head and blushed. Scales fell from her eyes also. She
was like Eve after the apple had taught her what she was. She wanted
to hide. But she could not break through the crowd. She must stand
and watch the dance through.

All this brief while Kedzie had stood wavering. There had been
a hitch somewhere. The other nymphs were delayed in their entrance.
One of them had stepped on a thorny rose and another had ripped her
tunic--she came in at last with a safety-pin to protect her from
the law; but then, safety-pins are among the primeval inventions.

According to the libretto, the wood-nymphs, terrified by a hunting-
party, ran to take refuge with the water-nymphs. The water-nymphs
were late likewise. The dryads came suddenly through Mrs. Noxon's
imported shrubs, puncturing them with rhythmic attitudes. These lost
something of their poetry from being held so long that equilibria
were lost foolishly.

Finally, the water-sprites came forth from cleverly managed
concealment in a bower and stood mid-thigh in the water about
the fountain. They attitudinized also, with a kind of childish
poetry that did not quite convince, for the fountain rained on
them, and some of them shivered as cold gouts of water smote their
shoulder-blades. One little Yiddish nymph gasped, "Oi, oi!" which
was perfect Greek, though she didn't know it. Neither did anybody
else. Several people snickered.

The hunting-music died away, and the wood-nymphs decided not to go
into the water home; instead, they implored the water-nymphs to come
forth from their liquid residence. But the water-nymphs refused.
The dryads tried to lure them with gestures and dances. It was all
dreadfully puerile, and yet somehow worth while.

The wood-nymphs wreathed a human chain about the marge of the pool.
Unfortunately the marble had been splashed in spots by the fountain
spray, and it was on the slipperiest of the spots that Kedzie had to
execute a pirouette.

Her pivotal foot slid; the other stabbed down in a wild effort
to restore her balance. It slipped. She knew that she was gone.
She made frenzied clutches at the air, but it would not sustain her.
She was strangely sincere now in her gestures. The crowd laughed--
then stopped short.

It was funny till it looked as if the nymph might be hurt. Jim
Dyckman darted forward to save her. He knocked Charity aside roughly
and did not know it. He arrived too late to catch Kedzie.

Kedzie sat into the pool with great violence. The spray she cast up
fatally spotted several delicate robes. That would have been of some
consolation to Kedzie if she had known it. But all she knew was that
she went backward into the wrong element. Her wrath was greater than
her sorrow.

Her head went down: she swallowed a lot of water, and when she kicked
herself erect at last she was half strangled, entirely drenched, and
quite blinded. The other nymphs, wood and water, giggled and shook
with sisterly affection.

Kedzie was the wettest dryad that ever was. She stumbled forward,
groping. Jim Dyckman bent, slipped his hands under her arms,
and hoisted her to land. He felt ludicrous, but his chivalry was
automatic.

Kedzie was so angry at herself and everybody else that she flung
off his hands and snapped, "Quit it, dog on it!"

Jim Dyckman quit it. He had for his pains an insult and a suit
of clothes so drenched that he had to go back to his yacht, running
the gantlet of a hundred ridicules.

When he vanished Kedzie found herself in garments doubly clinging
from being soaked. She was ashamed now, and hid her face in her arm.

Charity Coe took pity on her, and before the jealous Charity could
check the generous Charity she had stepped forward and thrown about
the girl's shoulders a light wrap she carried. She led the child to
the other wood-nymphs, and they took her back into the shrubbery.

"Wait till you hear what Miss Silsby's gotta say!" said one dryad,
and another added:

"Woisse than that is this: you know who that was you flang out at
so regardless?"

"I don't know, and I don't care," sobbed Kedzie.

"You would care if you was wise to who His Nibs was!"

"Who was it?" Kedzie gasped.

"Jim Dyckman--no less! You was right in his arms, and you hadda go
an' biff him."

"Oh, Lord!" sighed Kedzie. "I'll never do." She was thinking that
destiny had tossed her into the very arms of the aristocracy and
she had been fool enough to fight her way out.

Jim Dyckman, meanwhile, was clambering into his car with clothes
and ardor dampened. He was swearing to cut out the whole herd of
women.

And Charity Coe Cheever was chattering flippantly with a group of
the dispersing audience, while her heart was in throes of dismay
at her own feelings and Jim Dyckman's.




THE SECOND BOOK

MRS. TOMMIE GILFOYLE HAS HER PICTURE TAKEN




CHAPTER I

The scene was like one of the overcrowded tapestries of the
Middle Ages. At the top was the Noxon palace, majestic, serene,
self-confident in the correctness of its architecture and not
afraid even of the ocean outspread below.

The house looked something like Mrs. Noxon at her best. Just now she
was at her worst. She stood by her marble pool and glared at her mob
of guests dispersing in knots of laughter and indifference. There
were hundreds of men and women of all ages and sizes, and almost all
of them were startling the summer of 1915 with the fashion-plates
of 1916.

Mrs. Noxon turned from them to the dispersing nymphs of Miss Silsby's
troupe. The nymphs were dressed in the fashion of 916 B.C. They also
were laughing and snickering, as they sauntered toward the clump
of trees and shrubs which masked their dressing-tent. One of them
was not laughing--Kedzie. She was slinking along in wet clothes and
doused pride. The beautiful wrap that Mrs. Charity Cheever had flung
about her she had let fall and drag in a damp mess.

Mrs. Noxon was tempted to hobble after Kedzie and smack her for
her outrageous mishap. But she could not afford the luxury. She must
laugh with her guests. She marched after them to take her medicine
of raillery more or less concealed as they went to look at the other
sideshows and permit themselves to be robbed handsomely for charity.

Kedzie was afraid to meet Miss Silsby, but there was no escape.
The moment the shrubs closed behind her she fell into the ambush.
Miss Silsby was shrill with rage and scarlet in the face. She swore,
and she looked as if she would scratch.

"You miserable little fool!" she began. "You ought to be whipped
within an inch of your life. You have ruined me! It was the biggest
chance of my career. I should have been a made woman if it hadn't
been for you. Now I shall be the joke of the world!"

"Please, Miss Silsby," Kedzie protested, "if you please, Miss
Silsby--I didn't mean to fall into the water. I'm as sorry as
I can be."

"What good does it do me for you to be sorry? I'm the one to be
sorry. I should think you would have had more sense than to do
such a thing!"

"How could I help it, dog on it!" Kedzie retorted, her anger
recrudescent.

"Help it? Are you a dancer or are you a cow?"

Kedzie quivered as if she had been lashed. She struck back with
her best Nimrim repartee, "You're a nice one to call me a cow,
you big, fat, old lummox!"

Miss Silsby fairly mooed at this.

"You--you insolent little rat, you! You--oh, you--you! I'll never
let you dance for me again--never!"

"I'd better resign, then, I suppose," said Kedzie.

"Resign? How dare you resign! You're fired! That's how you'll resign.
You're fired! The impudence of her! She turns my life-work into
a laughing-stock and then says she'd better resign!"

"How about to-night?" Kedzie put in, dazed.

"Never you mind about to-night. I'll get along without you if
I have to dance myself."

The other nymphs shook under this, like corn-stalks in a wind.

But Kedzie was a statuette of pathos. She stood cowering barelegged
before Miss Silsby, fully clothed in everything but her right mind.
There was nothing Grecian about Miss Silsby except the Medusa glare,
and that turned Kedzie into stone. She finished her tirade by
thrusting some money into Kedzie's hand and clamoring:

"Get into your clothes and get out of my sight."

Rage made Miss Silsby generous. She paid Kedzie an extra week and
her fare to New York. Kedzie had no pocket to put her money in. She
carried it in her hand and laid it on the table in the tent as she
bent to whip her lithe form out of her one dripping garment.

The other nymphs followed her into the tent and made a Parthenonian
frieze as they writhed out of their tunics and into their petticoats.
They gathered about Kedzie in an ivory cluster and murmured their
sympathy--Miss Silsby not being within ear-shot.

Kedzie blubbered bitterly as she glided into her everyday things,
hooking her corsets askew, drawing her stockings up loosely, and
lacing her boots all wrong. She was still jolted with sobs as she
pushed the hat-pins home in her traveling-hat.

She kissed the other girls good-by. They were sorry to see her go,
now that she was going. And she was very sorry to go, now that she
had to.

If she had lingered awhile Miss Silsby would have found her there
when she relented from sheer exhaustion of wrath, and would have
restored her to favor. But Kedzie had stolen away in craven
meekness.

To reach the trade-entrance Kedzie had to skirt the accursed pool of
her destruction. Charity Coe was near it, seated on a marble bench
alone. She was pensive with curious thoughts. She heard Kedzie's
childish snivel as she passed. Charity looked up, recognized the
girl with difficulty, and after a moment's hesitation called to her:

"What's the matter, you poor child? Come here! What's wrong?"

Kedzie suffered herself to be checked. She dropped on the bench
alongside Charity and wailed:

"I fell into that damn' pool, and I've lost my jah-ob!"

Charity patted the shaken back a moment, and said, "But there are
other jobs, aren't there?"

"I don't know of any."

"Well, I'll find you one, my dear, if you'll only smile. You have
such a pretty smile."

"How do you know?" Kedzie queried, giving her a sample of her best.

Charity laughed. "See! That proves it. You are a darling, and too
pretty to lack for a job. Give me your address, and I'll get you
a better place than you lost. I promise you."

Kedzie ransacked her hand-bag and found a printed card, crumpled
and rouge-stained. She poked it at Charity, who read and commented:

"Miss Anita Adair, eh? Such a pretty name! And the address, my
dear--if you don't mind. I am Mrs. Cheever."

"Oh, are you!" Kedzie exclaimed. "I've heard of you. Pleased to
meet you."

Then Kedzie whimpered, and Charity wrote the address and repeated
her assurances. She also gave Kedzie her own card and asked her to
write to her. That seemed to end the interview, and so Kedzie rose
and said: "Much obliged. I guess I gotta go now. G'-by!"

"Good-by," said Charity. "I'll not forget you."

Kedzie moved on humbly. She looked back. Charity had fallen again
into a listless reverie. She seemed sad. Kedzie wondered what on
earth she could have to be sorry about. She had money and a husband,
and she was swagger.

Kedzie slipped through the gate out to the road. She did not dare
hire a carriage, now that she was jobless. She wished she had not
left paradise. But she dared not try to return. She was not "classy"
enough. Suddenly a spasm of resentment shook the girl.

She felt the hatred of the rich that always set Tommie Gilfoyle afire.
What right had such people to such majesty when Kedzie must walk?
What right had they to homes and yards so big that it tired Kedzie
out just to trudge past? Who was this Mrs. Cheever, that she should
be so top-lofty and bend-downy? Kedzie ground her teeth in anger and
tore Charity's card to bits. She flung them at the sea, but the wind
brought them back about her face stingingly. She walked on, loathing
the very motors that flashed by, flocks of geese squawking contempt.

She walked and walked and walked. The overpowering might of the big
houses in their green demesnes made her feel smaller and wearier, but
big with bitterness. She would have been glad to have a suit-case
full of bombs to blow those snobbish residences into flinders.

She was dog tired when, after losing her way again and again, she
reached the boarding-house where the dancers lodged. She packed
her things and went to the train, lugging her own baggage. When she
reached the station she was footsore, heartsore, soulsore. Her only
comfort was that the Silsby dancers had been placed early enough
on Mrs. Noxon's program for her to have failed in time to get home
the same day. She hated Newport now. It had not been good to her.
New York was home once more.

"When's the next train to New York?" she asked a porter.

"It's wint," said the porter. "Wint at four-five."

"I said when's the next train," Kedzie snapped.

"T'-marra' marnin'," said the porter.

"My Gawd!" said Kedzie. "Have I gotta spend the night in this hole?"

The porter stared. He was not used to hearing Mecca called a hole.

"Well, if it's that bad," he grinned, "you might take the five-five
to Providence and pick up the six-forty there. But you'll have to
git a move on."

Kedzie got a move on. The train swept her out along the edge of
Rhode Island. She knew nothing of its heroic history. She cared
nothing for its heroic splendor. She thought of it only as the
stronghold of an embattled aristocracy. She did not blame Miss
Silsby for her disgrace, nor herself. She blamed the audience,
as other actors and authors and politicians do. She blazed with
the merciless hatred of the rich that poor people feel when they
are thwarted in their efforts to rival or cultivate or sell to
the rich. Their own sins they forget as absolved, because the
sins have failed. It is the success of sin and the sin of success
that cannot be forgiven.

The little dancer whose foot had slipped on the wet marble of
wealth was shaken almost to pieces by philosophic vibrations too
big for her exquisite frame. They reminded her of her poet, of
Tommie Gilfoyle, who was afraid of her and paid court to her.
He appeared to her now as a radiant angel of redemption. From
Providence she telegraphed him that she would arrive at New York
at eleven-fifteen, and he would meet her if he loved her.

This done, she went to the lunch-counter, climbed on a tall stool,
and bought herself a cheap dinner. She was paying for it out of
her final moneys, and her brain once more told her stomach that
it would have to be prudent. She swung aboard the train when it
came in, and felt as secure as a lamb with a good shepherd on the
horizon. When she grew drowsy she curled up on the seat and slept
to perfection.

Her invasion of Newport was over and done--disastrously done, she
thought; but its results were just beginning for Jim Dyckman and
Charity Coe.

Eventually Kedzie reached the Grand Central Terminal--a much
different Kedzie from the one that once followed her father and
mother up that platform to that concourse! Her very name was
different, and her mind had learned multitudes of things good
and bad. She had a young man waiting for her--a poet, a socialist,
a worshiper. Her heavy suit-case could not detain her steps. She
dragged it as a little sloop drags its anchor in a gale.

Gilfoyle was waiting for her at the barrier. He bent to snatch
the suit-case from her and snatched a kiss at the same time. His
bravery thrilled her; his gallantry comforted her immeasurably.
She was so proud of herself and of him that she wasted never a
glance at the powdered gold on the blue ceiling.

"I'm terrible glad to see you, Tommie," she said.

"Are you? Honest?" he chortled.

They jostled into each other and the crowd.

"I'm awful hungry, though," she said, "and I've got oodles of
things to tell you."

"Let's eat," he said. They went to the all-night dairy restaurant
in the Terminal. He led her to one of the broad-armed chairs and
fetched her dainties--a triangle of apple pie, a circle of cruller,
and a cylinder of milk.

She leaned across the arm of the chair and told him of her mishaps.
He was so enraged that he knocked a plate to the floor. She snatched
the cruller off just in time to save it, and the room echoed
her laughter.

They talked and talked until she was talked out, and it was
midnight. He began to worry about the hour. It was a long ride
on the Subway and then a long walk to her boarding-house and then
a long walk and a long ride to his.

"I hate to go back to that awful Jambers woman and let her know
I'm fired," Kedzie moaned. "My trunk's in storage, anyhow, and
maybe she's got no room."

"Why go back?" said Tommie, not realizing the import of his words.
It was merely his philosophical habit to ask every custom "Why?"

"Where else is there to go to?" she sighed.

"If we were only married--" he sighed.

"Why, Tommie!"

"As we ought to be!"

"Why, Tommie Gilfoyle!"

And now he was committed. As when he wrote poetry the grappling-hooks
of rhyme dragged him into statements he had not dreamed of at
the start and was afraid of at the finish--so now he stumbled into
a proposal he could not clamber out of. He must flounder through.

The idea was so deliriously unexpected, so fascinatingly novel to
Kedzie, that she fell in love with it. Immediately she would rather
have died than remain unmarried to Tommie Gilfoyle.

But there were difficulties.




CHAPTER II

In the good old idyllic days it had been possible for romantic
youth to get married as easily as to get dinner--and as hard to get
unmarried as to get wings. Couples who spooned too long at seaside
resorts and missed the last train home could wake up a preacher and
be united in indissoluble bonds of holy matrimony for two dollars.
The preachers of that day slept light, in order to save the
reputations of foolish virgins.

But now a greedy and impertinent civil government had stepped in
and sacrilegiously insisted on having a license bought and paid for
before the Church could officiate. And the license bureau was not
open all night, as it should have been.

Kedzie knew nothing of this, but Gilfoyle was informed. Theoretically
he believed that marriage should be rendered impossible and divorce
easy. But he could no more have proposed an informal alliance with
his precious Kedzie than he could have wished that his mother had
made one with his father. His mother and father had eloped and been
married by a sleepy preacher, but that was poetic and picturesque,
seeing that they did not fail to wake the preacher. Gilfoyle's
reverence for Kedzie demanded at least as much sanctity about his
union with her.

It is curious how habits complicate life. Here were two people whom
it would greatly inconvenience to separate. Yet just because it was
a custom to close the license bureau in the late afternoon they
must wait half a night while the license clerk slept and snored,
or played cards or read detective stories or did whatever license
clerks do between midnight and office hours. And just because people
habitually crawl into bed and sleep between midnight and forenoon,
these two lovers were already finding it hard to keep awake in spite
of all their exaltation. They simply must sleep. Romance could wait.

Gilfoyle knew that there were places enough where Kedzie and he
could go and have no questions asked except, "Have you got baggage,
or will you pay in advance?" But he would not take his Kedzie to
any such place, any more than he would leave a chalice in a saloon
for safe-keeping.

In their drowsy brains projects danced sparklingly, but they could
find nothing to do except to part for the eternity of the remnant
of the night. So Gilfoyle escorted Kedzie to the Hotel Belmont door,
and told her to say she was an actress arrived on a late train. He
stood off at a distance while he saw that she registered and was
respectfully treated and led to the elevator by a page.

Then he moved west to the Hotel Manhattan and found shelter. And
thus they slept with propriety, Forty-second Street lying between
them like a sword.

The alarm-clock in Gilfoyle's head woke him at seven. He hated to
interrupt Kedzie's sleep, but he was afraid of his boss and he needed
his salary more than ever--twice as much as ever. He telephoned from
his room to Kedzie's room down the street and up ten stories and was
comforted to find that he woke her out of a sleep so sound that he
could hardly understand her words. But he eventually made sure that
she would make haste to dress and meet him in the restaurant.

They breakfasted together at half past eight. Kedzie was aglow with
the whole procedure.

"You ought to write a novel about us," she told Gilfoyle. "It would
be a lot better than most of the awful stories folks write nowadays.
And you'd make a million dollars, I bet. We need a lot of money now,
too, don't we?"

"A whole lot," said Gilfoyle, who was beginning to fret over the
probable cost of the breakfast.

It cost more than he expected--as he expected. But he was in for it,
and he trusted that the Lord would provide. They bought a ring at
a petty jewelry-shop in Forty-second Street and then descended to
a Subway express and emerged at the Brooklyn Bridge Station.

The little old City Hall sat among the overtowering buildings like
an exquisite kitten surrounded by mastiffs, but Gilfoyle's business
took him and his conquest into the enormous Municipal Building,
whose windy arcades blew Kedzie against him with a pleasant clash.

The winds of life indeed had blown them together as casually as
two leaves met in the same gutter. But they thought it a divine
encounter arranged from eons back and to continue for eons forward.
They thought it so at that time.

They went up in the elevator to the second floor, where, in the
fatal Room 258, clerks at several windows vended for a dollar apiece
the State's permission to experiment with matrimony.

There was a throng ahead of them--brides, grooms, parents, and
witnesses of various nationalities. All of them looked shabby and
common, even to Kedzie in her humility. All over the world couples
were mating, as the birds and animals and flowers and chemicals
mate in their seasons. The human pairs advertised their union by
numberless rites of numberless religions and non-religions. The
presence or absence of rite or its nature seemed to make little
difference in the prosperity of the emulsion. The presence or
absence of romance seemed to make little difference, either. But
it seemed to be generally agreed upon as a policy around the world
that marriage should be made exceedingly easy, and unmarriage
exceedingly difficult. In recruiting armies the same plan is
observed; every encouragement is offered to enlist; one has only
to step in off the street and enlist. But getting free! That is
not the object of the recruiting business.

Gilfoyle and Kedzie had to wait their turns before they could reach
a window. Then they had a cross-examination to face.

Kedzie giggled a good deal, and she leaned softly against the hard
shoulder of Gilfoyle while the clerk quizzed him as to his full name,
color, residence, age, occupation, birthplace, the name of his father
and mother and the country of their birth, and the number of his
previous marriages.

She grew abruptly solemn when the clerk looked at her for answers
to the same questions on her part; for she realized that she was
expected to tell her real name and her parents' real names. She
would have to confess to Tommie that she had deceived him and
cheated him out of a beautiful poem. Had he known the truth he
would never have written:

  Pretty maid, pretty maid, may I call you Kedzie?
  Your last name is Thropp, but your first name is--

Nothing rhymed with _Kedzie_.

While she gaped, wordless, Gilfoyle magnificently spoke for her,
proudly informed the clerk that her name was "Anita Adair," that
she was white (he nearly said "pink"), that her age was--he had
to ask that, and she told him nineteen. He gave her residence as
New York and her occupation as "none."

"What is your father's first name, honey?" he said, a little
startled to realize how little he knew of her or her past. She
had learned much news of him, too, in hearing his own answers.

"Adna," she whispered, and he told the clerk that her father's name
was Adna Adair. She told the truth about her mother's maiden name.
She could afford to do that, and she could honestly aver that she
had never had any husband or husbands "up to yet," and that she
had not been divorced "so far." Also both declared that they knew
of no legal impediment to their marriage. There are so few legal
impediments to marriage, and so many to the untying of the knot
into which almost anybody can tie almost anybody!

The clerk's facile pen ran here and there, and the license was
delivered at length on the payment of a dollar. For one almighty
dollar the State gave the two souls permission to commit mutual
mortgage for life.

Gilfoyle was growing nervous. He told Kedzie that he was expected
at the office. There were several advertisements to write for the
next day's papers, and he had given the firm no warning of what
he had not foreseen the day before. If they hunted for a preacher,
Gilfoyle would get into trouble with Mr. Kiam.

If they had listened to the excellent motto, "Business before
pleasure," they might never have been married. That would have
saved them a vast amount of heartache, both blissful and hateful.
But they were afraid to postpone their nuptials. The mating
instinct had them in its grip.

They fretted awhile in the hurlyburly of other love-mad couples
and wondered what to do. Gilfoyle finally pushed up to one of
the windows again and asked:

"What's the quickest way to get married? Isn't there a preacher
or alderman or something handy?"

"Aldermen are not allowed to marry folks any more," he was told.
"But the City Clerk will hitch you up for a couple of dollars.
The marriage-room is right up-stairs."

This seemed the antipodes of romance and Gilfoyle hesitated
to decide.

But Kedzie, knowing his religious ardor against religions, said:

"What's the diff? I don't mind."

Gilfoyle smiled at last, and the impatient lovers hurried out
into the corridor. They would not wait for the elevator, but ran
up the steps. They passed a trio of youth, a girl and two young
fellows. One of the lads gave the other a shove that identified
the bridegroom. The girl was holding her left hand up and staring
at her new ring. A pessimist might have seen a portent in the
cynical amusement of her smile, and another in the aweless speed
with which Gilfoyle and Kedzie hustled toward the awful mystery
of such a union as marriage attempts.

The wedlock-factory was busy. In spite of the earliness of the hour
the waiting-room was crowded, its benches full. The only place for
Kedzie to sit was next to a couple of negroes, the man in Ethiopian
foppery grinning up into the face of a woman who held his hat and
cane, and simpered in ebony.

Kedzie whispered to Gilfoyle her displeased surprise:

"Why, they act just like we do."

Kedzie liked to use _like_ like that. She felt belittled at
sharing with such people an emotion that seemed to her far too good
for them. Also she felt that the emotion itself was cheapened by
such company. She wished she had not consented to the marriage. But
it would excite attention to back out now, and the dollar already
invested would be wasted. For all she knew, the purchase of the
license compelled the completion of the project.

A group of Italians came from Room 365--two girls in white, a
bareheaded mother who had been weeping, a fat and relieved-looking
father, an insignificant youth who was unquestionably the new-born
husband.

Gilfoyle kept looking at his watch, but he had to wait his turn.
There was a book to be signed and a two-dollar bill to be paid.
At last, when the negro pair came forth chuckling, Kedzie and
Gilfoyle rushed into the so-called "chapel" to meet their fate.

The chapel was a barrenly furnished office. Its nearest approach
to an altar was a washstand with hot and cold running water. At
the small desk the couple stood while the City Clerk read the pledge
drawn up in the Corporation Counsel's office with a sad mixture of
religious, legal, and commercial cant:

"In the name of God, Amen.

"Do either of you know of any impediment why you should not be
legally joined together in matrimony, or if any one present can
show any just cause why these parties should not be legally joined
together in matrimony let them now speak or hereafter hold their
peace.

"Do you, Thomas Gilfoyle, take this woman as your lawfully wedded
wife, to live together in the state of matrimony? Will you love,
honor, and keep her, as a faithful man is bound to do, in health,
sickness, prosperity, and adversities, and forsaking all others
keep you alone unto her as long as you both shall live?

"Do you, Anita Adair, take this man for your lawfully wedded husband
to live together in the state of matrimony? Will you love, honor,
and cherish him as a faithful woman is bound to do, in health,
sickness, prosperity, and adversities, and forsaking all others
keep you alone unto him as along as you both shall live?

"For as both have consented in wedlock and have acknowledged same
before this company I do by virtue of the authority vested in me
by the laws of the State of New York now pronounce you husband
and wife.

"And may God bless your union."

The City Clerk had to furnish witnesses from his own staff while
he administered the secular rites and exacted the solemn promises
which so few have kept, and invoked the help of God which is so
rarely manifest or so subtly hidden, in the human-animal-angel
relation of marriage.

And now Anita Adair and Thomas Gilfoyle were officially welded into
one. They had received the full franchise each of the other's body,
soul, brain, time, temper, liberty, leisure, admiration, education,
past, future, health, wealth, strength, weakness, virtue, vice,
destructive power, procreative power, parental gift or lack,
domestic or bedouin genius, prejudice, inheritance--all.

It was a large purchase for three dollars, and it remained to be
seen whether either or both delivered the goods. At the altar of
Hymen, Kedzie had publicly vowed to love, honor, and cherish under
all circumstances. It was like swearing to walk in air or water as
well as on earth. The futile old oath to "obey" had been omitted
as a perjury enforced.

Kedzie Thropp, who had dome to New York only a few months before,
had done one more impulsive thing. First she had run away from her
parents. Now she had run away from herself. She had loved New York
first. Now she was infatuated with Tommie Gilfoyle. He was as
complex and mysterious a city as Manhattan. She would be as long
in reaching the heart of him.

There had been no bridesmaids to give the scene social grace, no
music or flowers to give it poetry, no minister to give it an odor
of sanctity. It was marriage in its cold, business-like actuality,
without hypnotism, superstition, or false pretense. Small wonder
that Kedzie had hardly left the marriage-room before she felt that
she was not married at all. The vaccination had not taken. She
was not one with Gilfoyle. And yet she must pretend that she was.
She must act as if they were one soul, one flesh; must share his
tenement, his food, his joys and anxieties. Of these last there
promised to be no famine.

Gilfoyle was in a panic about his office. He told Kedzie to devote
the morning to looking up some place to live. He would join her
at luncheon. He fidgeted while they waited for the elevator, Kedzie
staring at her ring with the same curious smile as the other girl.




CHAPTER III

They rode up-town in a Subway express to Forty-second Street.
heir first business treaty had to be drawn up in the crowd.

"How much do you want to pay for the flat, honey?" said Kedzie.

Gilfoyle was startled. Already the money-snake was in their Eden.
And she asked him how much he "wanted" to pay! It was only a form
of speech, but it grated on him.

"I haven't time to figure it out," he fretted. "I get twenty-five
dollars a week--darling. That's a hundred a month--dear." His pet
names came afterward, mere trailers. "Out of that we've got to get
something to eat and to wear, and there'll be street-car fare to
pay and--tooth-powder to buy, and we'll want something for theater
tickets, and--" He was aghast; at the multitude of things married
people need. He added, "And we ought to save a little, I suppose."

"I suppose so," said Kedzie, who was as much taken aback by the
mention of economy at such a time as he was by the mention of
expenditure. But she rose bravely to the responsibility: "I'll
do the best I can, and we'll be so cozy--ooh!"

Kedzie was used to small figures. He put into her hand all the cash
he had with him, which was all he had on earth--forty-two dollars.
He borrowed back the two dollars. Kedzie had her own money, about
forty more dollars. This, with twenty-five dollars a week, seemed
big; enough to her to keep them in luxury. They parted at the Grand
Central Terminal with looks of devoted agony.

She set out at once to look at flats and to visit furniture-stores.
She bought a _Herald_ and read the numberless advertisements.
Something was the matter everywhere. She had gone far and found
nothing but discouragement when the luncheon hour arrived.

Humble as her ideas were, they rebelled at what she and her
bridegroom would have to accept for their home. She had always
dreamed of marrying a beautiful man with a million dollars and
a steam yacht. She was to have been married by a swagger parson,
in a swagger church, and to have gone on a long voyage somewhere,
and come back at last to a castle on Fifth Avenue. She had lost
the parson; the voyage was not to be thought of; and the castle
was not even in the air.

She looked at one or two expensive apartments, just to see what real
apartments could be like. They stunned her with their splendors,
their liveried outguards, their elevators clanking like caparisoned
chariot-horses, their conveniences, their rentals--six or eight
thousand dollars a year, unfurnished!--six or seven times her
husband's whole annual earnings. They were beyond the folly of
a dream.

She would have to be content with what one could rent furnished
for twenty-five dollars a month. She would have to be her own
hired girl. She would have to toil in a few cells of a beehive
on a side-street. She would be chauffeuse to a gas-stove only.

She went to the luncheon tryst with a load of forebodings, but
Gilfoyle did not appear. She heard her name paged by a corridor-crier
and was called to the telephone, where her husband's voice told her
that there was a big upset at the office and he dared not leave.
He forgot to be tender in his endearments, and he forgot to explain
to her that he was talking in a crowded office with an impatient
boss waiting for him and a telephone-girl probably listening in.

Kedzie lunched alone, already a business man's wife.

She scoured the town all afternoon, and at last, in desperation,
took the furnished flat she happened to be in when she could go
no farther. She had to sign a year's lease, and pay twenty-five
dollars in advance.

They would live a condensed life there. Even the hall was shared
with another family. The secrets were also to be shared, evidently,
for Kedzie could hear all that went on in the other home--all, all!

But by this time she was so tired that any cranny would have been
welcome. She was even wearier than she had been when she occupied
the outdoor apartment under the park bench where she spent her second
night in New York. She called that an "aparkment" and liked the pun
so well that she longed to tell her husband. But that would have
compelled the telling of her real name, and she did not know him
well enough for that yet. She found that she did not know him
well enough yet for an increasing number of things. She began to be
afraid to have him come home. What would he be like as a husband?
What would she be like as a wife? Those are all-important facts that
one is permitted to learn after the vows of perfection are sealed.

When Kedzie had rested awhile she grew braver and lonelier. She would
welcome almost any husband for companionship's sake. She resolved to
have Tom's dinner ready for him. She dragged herself down the stairs
and up the hill to the grocer's and the butcher's and bought the raw
material for dinner and breakfast.

She telephoned Gilfoyle at his office, gave him the address and
invited him to dine with "Mrs. Gilfoyle." She chuckled over the
romance of it, but he was harrowed with office troubles. Her ardor
was a trifle dampened by his voice, but she found new thrills in
the gas-stove, a most dramatic instrument to play. It frightened
her with every manifestation. She turned the wrong handles and got
bad odors from it, and explosions. She burned her fingers and
the chops.

She stared in dismay at the charred first banquet and then marched
her weary feet down the stairs again and up the hill again to
a delicatessen shop. She had previously learned the fatal ease of
the ready-made meals they vend at such places, and she compiled
her first menu there.

When Gilfoyle came down the street and up the steps into his new
home and into her arms he tried to lay off care for a while. But
he could not hide his anxiety--and his ecstasy was half an ecstasy
of dread.

He did not like the shabby, showy furniture the landlord had selected.
But the warmed-up dinner amazed him. He had not imagined Kedzie so
scholarly a cook. She dared not tell him that she had cheated. He
found her wonderfully refreshing after a day of office toil and told
her how happy they would be, and she said, "You bet." Kedzie cleared
the table by scooping up all the dishes and dumping them into a big
pan and turning the hot water into it with a cake of soap. Then she
retreated to the wabbly divan in the living-room.

Gilfoyle went over to Kedzie like a lonely hound; and she laced still
tighter the arms that encircled her. They told each other that they
were all they had in the world, and they forgot the outside world for
the world within themselves. But the evening was maliciously hot and
muggy; it was going to rain in a day or so. That divan would hardly
support two, and there was no comfort in sitting close; it merely
added two furnaces together.

Clamor rose in the adjoining apartment. Their neighbors had children,
and the children did not want to go to bed. The parents nagged the
children and each other. The wrangle was insufferable. And the idea
came to Kedzie and Gilfoyle that children were one of the liabilities
of their own marriage. They were afraid of each other, now, as well
as of the world. If only they had not been in such haste to be
married! If only they could recall those hasty words!

Gilfoyle put out the lights--"because they draw the insects," he
said, but Kedzie thought that he was beginning to economize. He
was. Across the street they could see other heat-victims miserably
preparing for the night. They were careless of appearances.

In the back of the parlor was a window opening into a narrow
air-shaft. The one bedroom's one window opened on the same cleft.
If the curtain were not kept down the neighbors across the area
could see and be seen. If the window were left open they could be
heard; and when the curtain flapped in the occasional little puffs
of hot air, it gave brief glimpses of family life next door. That
family had a squalling child, too. Somewhere above, a rickety
phonograph was at work; and somewhere below, a piano was being
mauled; and somewhere else a ukelele was being thumped and a
doleful singer was snarling "The Beach at Waikiki." This racket
was their only epithalamium. It was more like the "chivaree" with
which ironic crowds tormented bridal couples back in Nimrim, Mo.

Gilfoyle was poet enough to enjoy a little extra doldrums at what
might have made a longshoreman peevish. He mopped sweat and fanned
himself with a newspaper till he grew frantic. He flung down the
paper and rose with a yawn.

"Well, this is one helluva honeymoon. I'm going to crawl into
the oven and fry."

Kedzie sat alone in the dark parlor a long while. She was cold now.
She had danced Greek dances in public, but she blushed in the dark
as she loitered over her shoelaces. She was so forlorn and so
disappointed with life that tears would have been bliss.

Somebody on that populous, mysterious air-shaft kept a parrot.
It woke Kedzie early in the morning with hysterical laughter that
pierced the ears like steel saws. There was something uncannily
real but hideously mirthless in its Ha-ha-ha! It would gurgle with
thick-tongued idiocy: "Polly? Polly? Polly wanny clacky? Polly?
Polly?"

Kedzie wondered how any one could care or dare to keep such a pest.
She wanted to kill it. She leaned out of the window and stared up.
Somewhere above the fire-escape rungs she could see the bottom of
its cage. If only she had a gun, how gladly she would have blown
Polly to bits.

She saw a frowsy-haired man in a nightgown staring up from another
window and yelling at the parrot. She drew her head in hastily.

The idol of her soul slept on. The inpouring day illumined him to
his disadvantage. His head was far back, his jaw down, his mouth
agape. During the night a beard had crept out on his cheeks. He was
startlingly unattractive.

Kedzie crouched on the bed and stared at him in wonder, in a
fascination of disgust. This was the being she had selected from
all mankind for her companion through the long, long years to come.
This was her playmate, partner, hero, master, financier, bedfellow,
lifefellow. For him she had given up her rights to freedom, to
praise, to chivalry, to individuality, her hopes of wealth, luxury,
flattery.

She glanced about the room--the pine bureau with its imitation
stain, broken handles, and curdled mirror, the ugly chairs, the
gilt radiator, the worn rug, the bed that other wretches had
occupied. She wondered who they were and where they were.

She remembered Newport, the Noxon home. She tried to picture a
bedroom there. She saw a palace of the best moving-picture period.
She remembered the first moving picture she had seen in New York,
and contrasted the Anita Adair of that adventure with the Anita
Adair of this. She recalled that girl locking her door against the
swell husband, and the poor but honest lover with the revolver.

Kedzie wished she had locked her own door--only there was no door,
merely a shoddy portiere, for there was not room to open a door.
Her old ambitions came back to her. She had planned to know rich
people and rebuke their wicked wiles. One rich man had held her in
his arms, lifted her out of the pool. It was no less a man than
Jim Dyckman, and she had repulsed him.

She caught a glimpse of her own tousled head in the mirror,
and she sneered at it. "You darn fool--oh, you darn fool!"

At last the parrot woke Gilfoyle. He snorted, bored his fists
into his eyes, yawned, scratched his head, stared at the unusual
furniture, flounced over, saw his mate, stared again, grinned,
said:

"Why, hello, Anita!"

He put out his hand to her. She wiggled away; he followed. She
slid to the floor and gasped:

"Don't touch me!"

"Why, what's the matter, honey?"

"Huh! What isn't the matter?"

He fumbled under the pillow for his watch, looked at it, yawned:

"Lord, it's only five o'clock. Good _night_!" He disposed
himself for sleep again. The parrot broke out in another horrible
Ha-ha! He sat up with an oath. "I'd like to murder the beast."

"Don't! I'm much obliged to it."

"Obliged to it? You must be crazy. Good Lord! hear it scream."

"Well, ain't life a scream?"

Gilfoyle was a graceless sleeper and a surly waker. He forgot that
he was a bridegroom.

He sniffed, yawned, flopped, buried one ear in the pillow and pulled
the cover over the other and almost instantly slept. His head on
the pillow looked like some ugly, shaggy vegetable. Kedzie wanted to
uproot the object and throw it out of the window, out of her life.
That was the head of her husband, the lord and master of her dreams!

Dainty-minded couples have separate bedrooms. Ordinary people accept
the homely phases of coexistence as inevitable and therefore
unimportant. They grow to enjoy the intimacy: they give and take
informality as one of the comforts of a home. They see frowsy hair
and unshaven cheeks and yawns as a homely, wholesome part of life
and make a pleasant indolence of them.

But Kedzie was in an unreasoning mood. She had hoped for unreasonable
delights. Marriage had been a goal beyond the horizon, at the base of
the rainbow. She had reached it. The girl Kedzie was no more. She was
a wife. Kedzie Thropp and Anita Adair were now Mrs. Thomas Gilfoyle.
Her soul cried out:

"This is my honeymoon! I am married, married forever to that
tousle-headed, bristle-jawed, brainless, heartless dub. I won't
stand for it. I won't! I won't!"

She wanted to outscream the parrot. Its inarticulate, horrible
cachinnations voiced her humor uncannily. She had to bury her
pouting lips in her round young arm to keep from insanely echoing
that maniacal Ha-ha-ha! That green-and-red philosopher expressed
her own mockery of life and love, with its profound and eloquent
Ha-ha-ha! Oh, ha-ha-ha! Ee, ha-ha-ha!




CHAPTER IV

Now, of course, Kedzie ought to have been happy. Millions of girls
of her age were waking up that morning and calling themselves wretched
because their parents or distance or some other cause prevented them
from marrying young fellows no more prepossessing asleep than Gilfoyle
was.

In Europe that morning myriads of young girls tossed in their beds
and shivered lest their young men in the trenches might have been
killed or mangled by some shell dropped from an airship or sent over
from a cannon or shot up from a mine. And those young men, alive or
dead, looked no better than Gilfoyle, if as neat.

In Europe and in Asia, that morning, there were young girls and nuns
and wives who were in the power of foreign soldiers whose language
they could not speak but could understand all too well--poor, ruined
victims of the tidal waves of battle. There were wives, young and
old, who had got their husbands back from war blind, crippled,
foolish, petulant. They had left part of their souls on the field
with their blood.

It was a time when it seemed that nobody had a right to be unhappy
who had life, health, shelter, and food. Yet America was perhaps as
discontented as Europe.

Kedzie had reason enough to make peace with life. Gilfoyle was as
valuable a citizen as she. She might have helped to make him a good
business man or a genuine poet. What is poetry, anyway, but the
skilful advertisement of emotions? She might at least have made of
Gilfoyle that all-important element of the Republic, a respectable,
amiable, ordinary man, perhaps the father of children who would be
of value, even of glory, to the world.

There was romance enough in their wedding. Others of the couples who
had bought licenses that day were rapturous in yet cheaper tenements,
greeting the new day with laughter and kisses and ambition to earn
and to save, to breed and grow old well.

But to be content with what or whom she had, Kedzie would have had
to be somebody else besides Kedzie; and then Gilfoyle would not
perhaps have met her or married her. Some man in Nimrim, Mo., would
have wed the little stay-at-home.

Kedzie, the pretty fool, apparently fancied that she would have been
happy if Gilfoyle had been a handsomer sleeper, and the apartment
a handsomer apartment, and the bank-account an inexhaustible fountain
of gold.

But would she have been? Peter Cheever was as handsome as a man
dares to be, awake or asleep; he had vast quantities of money, and
he was generous with it. But Zada L'Etoile was not happy. She dwelt
in an apartment that would have overwhelmed Kedzie by the depth of
its velvets and the height of its colors.

Yet Zada was crying this very morning--crying like mad because
while she had Cheever she had no marriage license. She tore her
hair and bit it, and peeled diamonds off her fingers and threw them
at the mirror like pebbles, and sopped up her tears with point-lace
handkerchiefs and hurled those to the floor--then hurled herself
after them. She was a tremendous weeper, Zada.

And in Newport there was a woman who had a marriage license but no
husband. She slept in a room too beautiful for Kedzie to have liked.
She did not know enough to like it. She would have found it cold.
Charity Cheever found it cold, but she slept at last, though the
salt wind blowing in from the sea tormented the light curtains and
plucked at the curls about Charity's face. There was salt in the
air, and her eyelashes were still wet with tears. She was crying
in her sleep, for loneliness.

Kedzie thought her room was small, but it was nearly as big as
the bedroom where Jim Dyckman had slept. He had a bigger room, but
he had given it to his father and mother, who had come to Newport
with him. They were a stodgy old couple enough now, and snoring
idyllically in duet after a life of storms and tears and discontents
in spite of wealth.

Jim's room was big for a yacht, but the yacht was narrow, built for
speed. Thirty-six miles an hour its turbines could shoot it through
the sea. It had to be narrow. We can't have everything--especially
on yachts.

Jim was barefoot, standing in his pajamas at a port-hole and trying
to see the Noxon home, imagining Charity there. He was denied her
presence and was as miserable as any waif in a poor farm attic.
Money seemed to make no visible difference in his despair.

If he thought of Kedzie at all, he dismissed her as a trifling
memory. He wanted Charity, who did not want him. Charity had
Cheever, who did not want her. Kedzie had Gilfoyle, and did not want
him. It looked as if the old jingle ought to be changed from "Finders
keepers, losers weepers" to "Losers keepers, finders weepers."

The day after Jim Dyckman pulled Kedzie out of the water he made
a desperate effort to convince himself that he could be happy
without the forbidden Charity Coe.

He breakfasted and played tennis, then swam at Bailey's Beach.
Beauties of every type and every conscience were there--pale, slim
ash blondes with legs like banister-spindles, and swarthy, slender
brunettes of the same Sheraton furniture. There were brunettes of
generous ovals, and blondes of heroic rotundities, and every scheme
of shape between. Minds were equally diversified--maternal young
girls and wicked old ladies, hilarious and sinister, intellectual
and athletic, bookish and horsy, a woman of a sort for every mood.

And Jim Dyckman was so wealthy and so simple and so likable and
important that it seemed nobody would refuse to accept him. But
he wanted Charity.

Later in the afternoon he gave up the effort to snub her and went
to the Noxon home. It was about the hour when Kedzie in her new
flat had been burning her fingers at the gas-stove. Jim Dyckman
was preparing to burn his fingers at the shrine of Mrs. Cheever.

He rang the bell and asked for Mrs. Noxon, though her motor was
waiting at the door, as he was glad to note. Mrs. Noxon came down
with her hat on and her gloves going on. She pinched Dyckman's cheek
and kissed him and said:

"It's sweet of you, Jimmie, to call on an old crone like me, and so
promptly. She'll be down in a minute. But you must be on your good
behavior, Jim, for they're talking about you, you know. They're
bracketing your name with Charity's."

"The dirty beasts! I'll--"

"You can't, Jim. But you can behave. Cheer her up a little. She's
blue about that dog of a Cheever. I've got to go and turn over the
money we earned yesterday. Quite a tidy sum, but I'll never give
another damned show as long as I live."

She left, and by and by Charity Coe drifted in, bringing strange
contentment with her. She greeted Jim with a weary cordiality. He
took her hand and kissed it and laid his other hand over it as usual.
She put her other hand on top of his and patted it--then withdrew her
slender fingers and sat down.

They glanced at each other and sighed. Jim was miserably informed now
that he had made the angelic Charity Coe a theme for gossip. He felt
guilty--irritatedly guilty, because he had the name without the game.

Charity Coe was in a dull mood. She was in a love lethargy. Her mind
was trying to persuade her heart that her devotion to Peter Cheever
was a wasted lealty, but her heart would not be convinced, though it
began to be afraid. She was as a watcher who sits in the next room
to one who is dying slowly and quietly. She could neither lose hope
nor use it.

Jim and Charity sat brooding for a long while. He had outstretched
himself on a sumptuous divan. She was seated on a carved chair,
leaning against the tall back of it like a figure in high relief.
About them the great room brooded colossally.

Gilfoyle would have hated Charity and Jim as perfect examples of the
idle rich, too stupid to work, too pampered to be worthy of sympathy.
But whether these two had a right to suffer or not, suffer they did.

The mansion was quiet. The other house-guests were motoring or darting
about the twilit tennis-court or trading in the gossip-exchange at
the Casino. Jim and Charity were marooned in a sleeping castle.

At length Jim broke forth, "For God's sake, sing."

Charity laughed a little and said, "All right--anything to make
you talk."

She went to the piano and shifted the music. There were dozens of
songs about roses. She dropped to the bench and began to play and
croon Edward Carpenter's luscious music to Waller's old poem,
"Go, Lovely Rose."

Jim began to talk almost at once. Charity went on singing, smiling
a little at the familiar experience of being asked to sing only to
be talked over. Jim grew garrulous as he read across her shoulder
with characteristic impoliteness.

_"Tell her that wastes her time and me,"_ he quoted; then
he groaned: "That's you and me, Charity Coe. But you're wasting
yourself most of all."

He bent closer to peek at the name of the author. "Who's this
feller Waller, who knows so much?"

"Hush and listen," she said, and hummed the song through. It made
a new and deep impression on her in that humor. She felt that she
had wasted the rosiness of her own life. Girlhood was gone; youth
was gone; carefreedom was gone. Like petals they had fallen from
the core of her soul. The words of the lyric stabbed her:

  Then die that she
    The common fate of all things rare
  May read in thee.
    How small a part of time they share
    That are so sweet and fair.

Her fingers slipped from the keys and, as it were, died in her lap.
Jim Dyckman understood a woman for once, and in a gush of pity for
her and of resentment for her disprized preciousness caught at her
to embrace her. Her hands came to life. The wifely instinct leaped
to the fore. She struck and wrenched and drove him off. She was
panting with wrath.

"What a rotten thing to do! Go away and don't come near me again.
I'm ashamed of you."

"Me, too," he snarled.




CHAPTER V

Jim slunk out and slunk down the marble steps and down the winding
walk and through the monstrous gate into the highway along the sea,
enraged at himself and at Charity and at Peter Cheever. If he had met
Cheever he would have picked him up and flung him over the sea-wall.
But there was little danger of Peter Cheever's being found so near
his wife.

_"Tell her that wastes her time and me,"_ kept running through
Jim's head. He was furious at Charity for wasting so much of him. He
had followed her about and moped at her closed door like a stray dog.
And she had never even thrown him a bone.

A wave ran up on the beach and seemed to try to embrace the earth,
possess it. But it fell away baffled. Over its subsiding pother sprang
a new wave with the same bosomful of desire and the same frantic
clutching here and there--the same rebuff, the same destruction
under the surge of the next and the next. The descending night gave
a strange pathos to the eternal vanity.

Jim Dyckman stood and faced the ocean. Once more he discovered that
life was too much for him to understand. He was ashamed of himself
for his vain endeavor to envelop Charity Coe and absorb her into
the deeps of his love. He was most ashamed because he had failed
and must slither back into the undertow with the many other men
whom Charity had refused to love.

He was ashamed of Charity Coe, too, for squandering her prime
and her pride. He was enraged at her blindness to Pete Cheever's
duplicity or her complacency with it. He hated Charity for a
while--nearly. At any rate he was ashamed of her, ashamed of
the world, in a rebel mood.

As he stood wind-blown and spray-flogged and glad to be beaten, a
shabby old carriage went by. It was piled to overflowing with some
of Miss Silsby's girls taking a seeing-Newport tour on the cheap.

The driver was, or said he had been in his time, coachman to some
of the oldest families. He ventured their names with familiarity
and knew their houses by heart. He told quaint stories of their
ways, how old Mrs. Noxon once swore down a mutinous stableman, how
Miss Wossom ran away with her coachman. There was something finely
old-fashioned and conservative about that. A new-rich would have
run away with a chauffeur.

The driver knew Jim Dyckman's back and pointed him out. The girls
laughed, remembering Kedzie's encounter with him. They laughed so
loud that Dyckman turned, startled by the racket. But the carriage
rolled them away and he did not hear them wondering what had become
of Kedzie. The gloaming saddened them, and they felt very sorry for
her. But Jim Dyckman gave her no thought.

He was tearing apart his emotions toward Charity and resolving that
he must never see her again. In the analytical chemistry of the soul
he found that this resolution was three parts hopelessness of winning
her, three parts a decent sense of the wickedness of courting another
man's woman, three parts resentment at her for treating him properly,
and one part a feeling that he would make himself most valuable to
her by staying away.

Never a homeless dog slinking through an alley in search of a
sidelong ash-barrel to sleep in felt more poverty-stricken, woebegone,
than Jim Dyckman. He moped along the stately road, as much afraid of
his future as Kedzie had been, trudging the same highway. She had
wondered if board and lodging would fail her. This was not Jim
Dyckman's fear, but his own was as great, for everybody was some
dreadful elbow-companion.

Lucian showed Jupiter himself cowering on his throne in the sky and
twiddling his thunderbolt with trembling hand as he wondered what
the fates held in store for him, and saw on earth the increasing
impudence of the skeptics.

So Jim Dyckman, unconscious that he was following in Kedzie's
footsteps, walked miserably on his way. He had no place to go to
but the finest yacht in the harbor. He had no money to depend on
but a few millions of his own and the Pelion plus Ossa fortunes
of his father and mother and their relatives--a mere sierra of
gold mountains.

He drifted down to the landing-place and went out to his yacht
in a hackney launch. He was received at her snowy sides as if he
were the emperor of somewhere come to visit one of his rear admirals.
He went up the steps as if he were a school-boy caught playing hooky
and going up-stairs to play the bass drum to his mother's slipper.

His mother was on the shade-deck, reclining. The big white wicker
lounge looked as if a small avalanche had fallen on it. From the
upturned points of her white shoes back to her white hair she was
a study in foreshortening that would have interested a draftsman.

Spread out on a huge wicker arm-chair sat Jim's father, also all
white, except for his big pink hands and his big pink face. It
seemed that he ought to have been smoking a white cigar. As a matter
of fact, he had sat so still that half the weed was ash.

When the two moved to greet Jim there was a mighty creaking of wicker.
There was another when Jim spilled his own great weight into a chair.
A steward in white raised his eyebrows inquiringly and Jim nodded
the eighth of an inch. It was the equivalent of ordering a drink.

Dyckman senior turned to Dyckman seniora and said, "Enter Hamlet in
the graveyard! Where's the skull, my boy, where's the skull?"

"Let the child alone," Mrs. Dyckman protested. "It's too hot for
fooling. You might kiss your poor mother, though. No, don't get up,
just throw me one."

Jim rose heavily, went to her, bent far down, kissed her, and
would have risen again, but her big arms encompassed his neck and
held him, uncomfortably, till he knelt by her side and laid his
head on her bosom.

He felt exceedingly foolish, but nearer to comfort than he had been
for a long while. He wished that he might be a boy again in his
mother's arms and be altogether content and carefree as he had been
there. As if children were content and carefree! Great Heavens!
do they not begin to squirm and kick before they are born?

Mrs. Dyckman was suffocated a trifle by his weight and her own and
her corsets, but her heart ached for him somewhere down deep and
she whispered:

"Can't he tell his mother what he wants? Maybe she can get it
for him."

He laughed bitterly and extricated himself from her clasp, patted
her fat arm, and turned away. His father jealously seized his
sleeve.

"Anything serious, old man? You know I'm here."

Jim squeezed his father's hand and shook his head and turned to
the drink which had arrived. He took it from the tray to his chair
and sat meditating Newport across the top of his glass. Between
the rail of the deck and the edge of the awning he saw a long slice
of it. It was vanity and emptiness to him. He spoke at length.

"Fact is, folks, I've got to go back to New York or somewhere."

"Good Lord!" his father said. "I'm all mixed up in a golf tournament.
I think I've got a chance to lick the boots off old Wainwright."

"Oh dear!" sighed Mrs. Dyckman, "there's to be the most interesting
lecture by that Hindu poet. And it's so much more comfortable here
than ashore. This boat is the coziest you've ever had."

"Stay here, darling," said Jim. "I'll make you a present of her."

"Oh, that's glorious," said Mrs. Dyckman. "I've never had a yacht
of my own. It's a shame to take it from you, but you can get another.
And of course you'll always be welcome here--which is more than
a certain other big Dyckman will be if he doesn't look sharp."

"For the Lord's sake, Jim, don't give it to her. She's the meanest
old miser about her own things." Dyckman senior pushed his chair
back against the rail.

"Watch out!" Mrs. Dyckman gasped. "You're scraping the paint off
my yacht."

Jim rose again. "I've just about time to make the last train
for the day," he said.

His mother sat up and clutched at his hand. "Can't I help you, honey?
Please let me! What is the matter?"

"The matter is I'm a lunkhead and Newport bores me stiff. That's all.
Don't worry. I'll go get the packing started."

He went along the deck, and his parents helplessly craned their
necks after him. His father groaned. Jim had "everything." There
was nothing to get for him, no toy to buy to divert him with.

"He wants a new toy, and he doesn't know what it is," said
the old man.

But Jim wanted an old toy on a shelf too high for his reach. He
ran away from the sight of it.

And Dyckman was fleeing to Charity's next resting-place, after all,
for she also returned in a few days to New York. She was restive
under the goad to return to France. She repented her selfish neglect
of the children of all ages she had adopted abroad. One thing
held her back--the dread of putting the ocean again between her
and her husband.

She thought it small of her to leave so many heroes to suffer without
her ministrations, in order that she might prevent one non-hero
from having too good a time without her ministrations. But womankind
has never been encouraged to adopt the policy of the greatest good
to the greatest number. Hardly!

Charity was conscience-smitten, however, and she cast about for a way
to absolve herself. Money is the old and ever-reliable way of paying
debts physical, moral, and religious. Charity determined to arrange
some big fete to bring in a heap of money for the wounded of France,
the blind fathers, and the fatherless children.

Everybody was giving entertainments at this time in behalf of
some school of victims of the war. The only excuse for amusements
in America seemed to be that the profits went to the belligerents
in one way or another.

Charity was distressed by the need of an oddity, a novel note which
should make itself heard among the clamors for Belgian relief, for
Polish relief, for Armenian succor, for German, French, Italian,
Russian widows and orphans.

Charity's secretary, Miss Gurdon, made dozens of suggestions, but
none of them was big enough to interest Charity. One day a card
came up to her with a letter of introduction from Mrs. Noxon:


CHARITY DEAR,--This will acquaint you with a very clever girl, Miss
Grace Havender. Her mother was a school friend of mine. Miss Havender
arranges to have moving pictures taken of people. They are ever
so much quainter than stupid still-life pictures. Posterity ought
to see you with your poor wounded soldiers, but meanwhile we really
should have a chance to perpetuate you as you are. You are always
on the go, and an ordinary picture does not represent you.

Anyway, you will be nice to Miss Havender, for the sake of

Yours affectionately,

MARTHA NOXON.


Charity did not want a picture of herself, but she went down to
get rid of Miss Havender politely and to recommend her to friends
of greater passion for their own likenesses. Miss Havender was
a forward young person and launched at once into a defense of
moving pictures.

"Oh, I admire the movies immensely," Charity interposed. "We had
some of them in the hospitals abroad. If you could have seen that
dear Charlie Chaplin convulse a whole ward of battered soldiers
and make them forget their pain and their anxieties! He was more
of a nurse than a hundred of us. If he isn't a benefactor, I don't
know who is. Oh, I admire the movies, but I'd rather see them than
be them, you know.

"Still, an idea has just occurred to me. You know I'm terribly in
need of a pile of money."

Miss Havender looked about her and smiled.

"Oh, I don't mean for myself. I have far too much, but for the
soldiers. I want something that will bring in a big sum. It occurs
to me that if a lot of us got up a story and acted it ourselves,
it would be tremendously interesting to--well, to ourselves. And
our friends would flock to see it. Amateur performances are ghastly
from an artistic standpoint, but they're great fun.

"It just struck me that if we got up a play and had a cast made up
of Mr. Jim Dyckman and Tom Duane and Winnie Nicolls and Miss Bettany
and the young Stowe Webbs and Mrs. Neff and people like that it
would be dreadfully bad art, but much more amusing than if we had
all the stars in the world--Mr. Drew and his daughter and his niece
Miss Barrymore and her brothers, and Miss Anglin and Miss Bates or
Miss Adams or anybody like that. Don't you think so? Or what do you
think? Could it be done, or has it been--or what about it?"

Miss Havender gasped. She saw new vistas of business opening
before her.

"Yes, it has been done in a small way, and it was great fun, as you
say; but it would have been more fun if it hadn't been so crude.
What you would need would be a director who was not an amateur.
Now, our director is marvelous--Mr. Ferriday. He's the Belasco of
the photoplays. He's as great as Griffith. He takes his art like
a priest. If you had him you could do wonders."

"Then we must have him, by all means," said Charity, smiling a
little at the gleam in Miss Havender's eyes. She had a feeling
that Miss Havender had a deep, personal interest in Mr. Ferriday.
Miss Havender had; most of the women in his environs had. In the
first place, he was powerful and could increase or diminish or
check salaries. He distributed places and patronage with a royal
prerogative. But he was hungry for praise and suffered from the
lack of social prestige granted "the new art."

Miss Havender seconded Charity's motion with enthusiasm. After a
long conference it was agreed that Miss Havender should broach the
matter to the great Mr. Ferriday while Charity recruited actors
and authors.

As Charity rummaged in her hand-bag for a pencil to write Miss
Havender's telephone number with, she turned out Kedzie Thropp's
crumpled, shabby card. She started.

"Oh, for Heaven's sake! The poor child! I had forgotten her
completely. You might be able to do something for her. This Miss
Adair is the prettiest thing, and I promised to get her a job. She
might photograph splendidly. Won't you try to find her a place?"

"I'll guarantee her one," said Miss Havender, who was sure that the
firm would be glad to put Mrs. Cheever under obligations. The firm
was in need of patronage, as Mr. Ferriday's lavish expenditures
had crippled its treasury, while his artistic whims had held up
the delivery of nearly finished films.

Miss Havender told Charity to send the girl to her at the office
any day and she would take care of her. Charity kept Kedzie's card
in her hand, and, as soon as Miss Havender was gone, ran to her desk
to write Kedzie. She told a pale lie--it seemed a gratuitous insult
to confess that she had forgotten.


DEAR MISS ADAIR,--Please forgive my delay in keeping my promise,
but I have been unable to find anything likely to interest you till
to-day. But now Miss Grace Havender, of the Hyperfilm Company, has
just assured me that if you will call on her at her office she will
see that you are engaged. You will photograph so beautifully that
I am sure you will have a great career. Please don't fail to call
on Miss Havender.

Yours, with best wishes,

CHARITY C. CHEEVER.


She sent the letter to the address Kedzie had given her--which was
that of Kedzie's abandoned boarding-house.




CHAPTER VI

Since Kedzie, by the time her marriage had reached its first
morning-after, had already found her brand-new husband odious,
there was small hope of her learning to like him or their poverty
better on close acquaintance.

When he left her for his office she missed him, and her heart
warmed toward him till he came home again. He always brought new
disillusionment with him. He spent his hours out of office in
bewailing his luck, celebrating the hardness of the times, and
proclaiming the hopelessness of his prospects.

And then one evening he arrived with so doleful a countenance that
Kedzie took pity on him. She perched herself on his lap and asked
him what was worrying him.

"Nothing much, honey," he groaned, "except that I've lost my job."

Kedzie was thunderstruck. She breathed the expletive she learned
from her latest companions. "My Gawd!"

Gilfoyle nodded dreadfully: "Business has been bad, anyway. Kalteyer,
with his chewing-gum, was about our only big customer, and now he's
gone bust. Yep. The bank's shut down on his loans, and he was caught
with a mountain of bills on his hands. And the Breathasweeta Chewing
Gum stopped selling. People didn't seem to take to the perfume idea."

"I just hate people!" Kedzie growled, pacing the floor.

Gilfoyle went on, bitterly: "Remember how they all said I was such
a genius for thinking up the name 'Breathasweeta,' and the perfumery
idea? And how they liked my catch-phrase?"

Kedzie nodded.

Gilfoyle grew sarcastic: "Well, a man's a genius if he succeeds, and
a fool if he doesn't. I'm just as sure as ever that there's a fortune
in Breathasweeta. But when Kalteyer's bankers got cold feet I lost
my halo. He and Kiam have been roasting the life out of me. They
blame me! They've kept knocking me and quoting 'Kiss me again--who
are you?' and then groaning. It's funny. I loved it when everybody
else said it was great. But I didn't care much for it myself, the
way they said it."

Kedzie flung herself on the tremulous wabbly-legged divan. Kedzie
didn't like the phrase, either, now. When he had first smitten it
from his brain she had thought it an inspiration and him a king.
Now it sounded silly, coarse, a little indecent. Of course it had
not succeeded. How could he ever have been so foolish as to utter
it--"Kiss me again--who are you?" Why, it was vulgar!

Gilfoyle looked dismally incompetent as he drooped and mumbled. It
is hard to tell an autobiography of failure and look one's best.

"Didn't you tell him you was--you were married?" queried Kedzie.

"I hadn't the courage."

"Courage! Well, I like that! So you're fired! Just like me. Funny!
And here we are, married and all. My Gaw--"

"Here we are, married and all. They'll let me finish the week, but
my goose is cooked, I guess. Jobs are mighty scarce in my line of
business. Everybody's poor except the munitions crowd. I wish I knew
how to make dynamite."

Kedzie pushed her wet hair back from her brow and tore her waist open
a little deeper at the throat. This was carrying the joke of marriage
a little too far even for her patient soul.

Soon Gilfoyle's office was closed to him and he was at home almost
all day. That finished him with Kedzie.

He had not improved on connubial acquaintance. He was lazy and
sloven of mornings, and since he had no office to go to he grew more
neglectful of his appearance than ever. His end-to-end cigarettes
got on Kedzie's nerves and cost a nagging amount of money, especially
as she could not learn to like them herself.

He tried to write poetry for the magazines and permanently destroyed
what little respect Kedzie had for the art. Hunting for some little
love-word that was unimportant when found threw him into frenzies of
rage. He went about mumbling gibberish.

"What in hell rhymes with _heaven_?" he would snarl. "_Beven,
ceven, Devon, fevon, gevin, given_--" And so on to "_zeven_."
Then "_breven, creven, dreven_" and "_bleven, eleven,
dleven_" and "_pseven, spleven, threven_" and so forth.

At length he would hurl his pen across the room, pull at his hair,
and light another cigarette. Cigarette always rhymed with cigarette.

After a day or two of this drivel he produced a brief lyric with
a certain fleetness of movement; it had small freight to carry. He
took it to a number of editors he knew, and one of them accepted
it as a kindness.

Kedzie was delighted till she heard that it would bring into the
exchequer about seven dollars when the check came, which would be
in two weeks.

When Gilfoyle was not fighting at composition he was calling the
editors hard names and deploring the small remuneration given to
poets by a pork-packing nation. Or he would be hooting ridicule
at the successful poets and growing almost as furious against the
persons addicted to the fashionable _vers libre_ as he was
against the wealthy classes.

It seemed to Kedzie that nothing on earth was less important than
prosody, and that however badly poets were paid, they were paid more
than they earned. She grew so lonely for some one to talk to that
she decided to call on old Mrs. Jambers at the boarding-house. She
planned to stop in at dinner-time, in the hope of being asked to
sit in at a real meal. The task of cooking what she could afford
to buy robbed her of all appetite, and she was living mainly on
fumes of food and gas.

She was growing thinner and shabbier of soul, and she knew it.
She put off the call till she could endure her solitude no longer;
then she visited Mrs. Jambers. A new maid met her at the door and
barred her entrance suspiciously. Mrs. Jambers was out. So was Mrs.
Bottger. So were the old boarders that Kedzie knew. New boarders
had their rooms, Kedzie was exiled indeed.

She turned away, saying: "Tell Mrs. Jambers that Anita Adair stopped
to say hello. I was just passing."

"Anita Adair?" said the maid. "You was Anita Adair, yes? Wait once.
It is a letter for you by downstairs."

She closed the door in Kedzie's face. Some time later she came back
and gave Anita the letter from Charity. It was several days old. She
read it with amazement. The impulse to tear it up as she had torn
up Charity's card in Newport did not last long. She went at once
to a drugstore and looked up the telephone number and the address
of the Hyperfilm Company. She repaid the druggist with a smile and
a word of thanks; then she took a street-car to the office.

Miss Havender, who was also a scenario-writer and editor, was very
busy. She had an executive manner that strangely contradicted her
abilities to suffer under the pangs of love and unrequited idolatry.
But then, business men are no more immune to the foolish venom on
Cupid's arrows than poets--perhaps less, since they have no outlet
of rhapsody. That was one of the troubles with Kedzie's poet. By
the time Gilfoyle had finished a poem of love he was so exhausted
that any other emotion was welcome, best of all a good quarrel and
the healthful exercise of his poetic gifts for hate. He could hate
at the drop of a hat.

When the office-boy brought Charity's letter of introduction to Miss
Havender with the verbal message that Miss Adair was waiting outside
Miss Havender nodded. She decided to procure this Miss Adair a good
job in order to curry favor with Mrs. Cheever. She would advise Mr.
Ferriday to pay her marked attention, too.

But when she caught sight of Kedzie running the gantlet of the
battery of authors and typists, and noted how pretty she was, Miss
Havender decided that it would not be good for Mr. Ferriday to pay
marked attention to this minx. He had a habit of falling in love
with women more ardently than with scenarios. He was a despot with
a scenario, and he could quickly make a famous novel unrecognizable
by its own father or mother. But a pretty woman could rule him
ludicrously while her charm lasted.

Miss Havender would gladly have turned Kedzie from the door, but
she did not dare. She had promised Mrs. Cheever to give the girl
a job. But she had not promised what kind of job it should be.

She received Kedzie with such brusqueness that the frightened girl
almost fell off the small rim of chair she dared to occupy. She
offered Kedzie a post as a typist, but Kedzie could not type; as
a film-cutter's assistant, but Kedzie had never seen a film; as
a printing-machine engineer or a bookkeeper's clerk, but Kedzie
had no ability to do things. She could merely look things.

Finally Miss Havender said: "I'm awfully sorry, Miss Adair, but the
only position open is a place as extra woman. There is a big ballroom
scene to be staged tomorrow, and a low dance-hall the next day, and
on Monday a crowd of starving Belgian peasants. We could use you in
those, but of course you wouldn't care to accept the pay."

She said this hopefully. Kedzie answered, hopelessly:

"What's the pay?"

"Three dollars."

"I'll take it."

Miss Havender accepted the inevitable, gave her the address
of the studio--far up-town in the Bronx--and told her to report
at eight the next morning.

Kedzie went back to her home in a new mood. She was the breadwinner
now, if not a cake-earner. Gilfoyle was depressed by her good news,
and she was indignant because he was not happy. The poor fellow was
simply ashamed of his own inability to support her in the style she
had been accustomed to dreaming about.

Kedzie was sullen at having to get the dinner that night. The hot
water would not help to give her hands the ballroom texture. The
next morning she had to leave early. Gilfoyle was too tired of doing
nothing to get up, and she resolved to buy her breakfast ready-made
outside. Her last glance at her husband with his frowsy hair on his
frowsy pillow infuriated her.

The experience at the big studio assuaged her wrath against life.
It was something new, and there was a thrill in the concerted action
of the crowds. She wore a rented ball-gown which did not fit her.
Seeing how her very shoulders winced at their exposure, one would
not have believed that she was a graduate of the Silsby school of
near to nature in next to nothing.

She danced with an extra man, Mr. Clarence Yoder, a portly actor
out of work. He was a costume-play gentleman, and Kedzie thought him
something grand. He found her an entrancing armload. He was rather
aggressive and held her somewhat straitly to his exuberant form, but
he gave her so much information that she did not snub him. She did
not even tell him that she was married. Indeed, when at the close
of a busy day he hinted at a willingness to take her out to see
a picture that evening, she made other excuses than those that
actually prevented her accepting. She spent a doleful evening at
home with her dour husband and resented him more than ever.

On the second day Kedzie was a slum waif and did not like it. She
pouted with a sincerity that was irresistible.

Mr. Ferriday did not direct the crowd scenes in these pictures. His
assistant, Mr. Garfinkel, was the slave-driver. Mr. Yoder cleverly
called him "Simon Legree." Kedzie did not know who Mr. Legree was,
but she laughed because Mr. Yoder looked as if he wanted her to
laugh, and she had decided that he was worth cultivating.

During the course of the day, however, Mr. Garfinkel fell afoul of
Mr. Yoder because of the way he danced with Kedzie. It was a rough
dance prettily entitled "Walking the Dog." Mr. Yoder, who did a
minuet in satin breeches to his own satisfaction, pleased neither
himself nor Mr. Garfinkel in the more modern expression of the
dancer's art.

Mr. Garfinkel called him a number of names which Mr. Yoder would
never have tolerated if he had not needed the money. He quivered
with humiliation and struggled to conform, but he could not please
the sneering overseer. He sought the last resort of those persecuted
by critics:

"Maybe you can do better yourself!"

"Well, I hope I choke if I can't," Garfinkel said as he passed the
manuscript to the camera-man and summoned Kedzie to his embrace.
"Here, Miss What's-your-name, git to me."

Kedzie slipped into his clutch, and he took her as if she were a
sheaf of wheat. His arms loved her lithe elasticities. He dragged
her through the steps with a wondering increase of interest. "Well,
say!" he muttered for her private consumption, "you're a little bit
of all right. I'm not so worse myself when I have such help."

He danced with her longer than was necessary for the demonstration.
Then he reluctantly turned her over to Mr. Yoder. Kedzie did not
like Mr. Yoder any more. She found him fat and clumsy, and his hands
were fat and clammy.

Mr. Garfinkel had to show him again.

Kedzie could not help murmuring up toward his chin, "I wish I could
dance with you instead of him."

Garfinkel muttered down into her topknot: "You can, girlie, but not
before the camera. There's a reason. How about a little roof garden
this evening, huh?"

Kedzie sighed, "I'm sorry--I can't."

Garfinkel realized that the crowd was sitting up and taking notice,
and so he flung Kedzie back to Yoder and proceeded with the picture.
He was angry at himself and at Kedzie, but Kedzie was angered at her
husband, who was keeping her from every opportunity of advancement.
Even as he loafed at home he prevented her ambitions. "The dog in
the manger!" she called him.

Garfinkel paid her no further attention except to take a close-up
of her standing at a soppy table and drinking a glass of stale beer
with a look of desperate pathos. She was supposed to be a slum waif
who had never had a mother's care. Kedzie had had too much of
the same.

The next day was a Saturday. Kedzie did not work. She was lonely for
toil, and she abhorred the flat and the neighbors. The expressive
parrot was growing tautological. Kedzie went out shopping to be
rid of Gilfoyle's nerves. He was in travail of another love-jingle,
and his tantrums were odious. He kept repeating _love_ and
_dove_ and _above_, and _tender, slender, offend her,
defender_, and _kiss_ and _bliss_ till the very words
grew gibberish, detestable nonsense.

Kedzie wandered the shops in a famine of desire for some of the new
styles. Her pretty body cried out for appropriate adornment as its
birthright. She was ashamed to go to the studio a third time in
the same old suit. She ordered one little slip of a dress sent home
"collect." She had hoarded the remnant of her Silsby dollars. When
she reached home the delivery-wagon was at the curb and the man was
up-stairs. Gilfoyle greeted Kedzie with resentment.

"What's this thing? I've got no money to pay it. You know that."

"Oh, I know that well," said Kedzie, and she went to the kitchen,
where she surreptitiously extracted the money from the depths of
the coffee-canister.

She paid for the dress and put it on. But she would not let Gilfoyle
see her in it. She did not mind buying his cigarettes half so much
as she minded paying for her own clothes. It outraged the very
foundation principles of matrimony to have to pay for her own
clothes.

Sunday was an appallingly long day to get through. She was so
frantic for diversion that she would have gone to church if she
had had anything fashionable enough to worship in. In the afternoon
she went out alone and sat on a bench in upper Riverside Drive.
A number of passers-by tried to flirt with her, but it was rather
her bitterness against men than any scruple that kept her eyes
lowered.

She would have been excited enough if she had known that the
pictures in which she played a small part were being run off in
the projection-room at the studio for Mr. Ferriday's benefit.

Everybody was afraid of him. The heads of the firm were hoping that
he would approve the reels and not order them thrown out. They were
convinced that they would have to break with him before he broke
them. Mr. Garfinkel was hoping for a word of approval from the
artistic tyrant.

But Ferriday was fretful and sarcastic about everything. Suddenly
Miss Havender noted that he was interested, noted it by the negative
proof of his sudden repose and silence. She could tell that he was
leaning forward, taut with interest. She saw that Anita Adair was
floating across the screen in the arms of Mr. Yoder.

There followed various scenes in which Kedzie did not appear,
close-up pictures of other people. Ferriday fell back growling.
Then he came bolt upright as the purring spinning-wheel of
the projection machine poured out more of Kedzie.

Suddenly he shouted through the dark: "Stop! Wait! Go back! Give
us the last twenty feet again. Who is that girl--that dream? Who
is she, Garfinkel?"

"I don't know her name, sir."

"Don't know her name! You wouldn't! Well, the whole world will know
her name before I get through with her. Who is she, anyway?"

Miss Havender spoke. "Her name is Adair--Anita Adair."

"Anita Adair, eh? Well, where did she come from? Who dug her up?"

"I did," said Miss Havender.

"Good for you, old girl! She's just what I need." And now he studied
again the scene in which Kedzie took down the draught of bitter
beer, and there was a superhuman vividness in the close-up, with
its magnified details in which every tiny muscle revealed its soul.

"Look at her!" Ferriday cried. "She's perfect. The pathos of her!
She wants training, like the devil, but, Lord, what material!"

He was as fanatic as a Michelangelo finding in a quarry a neglected
block of marble and seeing through its hard edges the mellow contours
of an ideal. He was as impatient to assail his task and beat off
the encumbering weight.




CHAPTER VII

Kedzie wore her new frock when she reached the studio on Monday
morning. She greeted Mr. Garfinkel with an entreating smile, and
was alarmed by the remoteness of his response. He was cold because
she was not for him. He led her respectfully to the anteroom of
the sacred inclosure where Ferriday was behaving like a lion in
a cage, belching his wrath at his keepers, ordering the fund-finders
to find more funds for his great picture. It threatened to bankrupt
them before it was finished, but he derided them as imbeciles,
moneychangers, misers.

Garfinkel was manifestly afraid of Ferriday's very echo, and he
cowered a little when Ferriday burst through the door with mane
bristling and fangs bared.

"Well, well, well!" Ferriday stormed. "What do you want, Garfinkel?
What do you want, Garfinkel? What do you want?"

"You told me to bring Miss Adair to you as soon as she arrived,
and--"

The lion roared as gentle as a sucking dove.

"And this is Miss Adair, is it? Of course it is. Welcome to our
little boiler-factory, my dear. Come in and sit down. Garfinkel,
get her a chair and then get out. Sit down, child. I never bite
pretty girls."

Kedzie was pleasantly terrified, and she wondered what would befall
her next. She gave the retreating Garfinkel no further thought. She
sat and trembled before the devouring gaze of the great Ferriday.
He studied her professionally, but he was intensely, extravagantly
human. That was why he appealed to the public so potently. He took
their feelings and set them on fire and juggled with them flaming.

He had such caloric that he kindled actors and actresses to
unsuspected brilliances. He made tinder of the dry-as-dusts,
and he brought the warm-hearted to a white-hot glow.

He dealt with primary emotions crudely but vigorously. A soldier
saluting an officer became in a Ferriday picture a zealot rendering
a national homage. A maid watching her lover walk away angry became
a Juliet letting Romeo go; a child weeping over a broken doll was
an epitome of all regret. A mother putting a light in the window for
an erring daughter's guidance was something new, an allegory as great
as Bartholdi's Liberty putting her lamp in the window of the nation.

He was as intense with humor as with sorrow. A girl washing dishes
brought shrieks of laughter at the little things she did--the
struggle with the slippery soap, the recoil from the hot plate,
the carelessness with the towel.

Ferriday had not talked to Kedzie two minutes before she was wringing
her hands with excitement. He was discovering her to herself. He told
her the story of a picture he wanted to put her in. He had withheld
it for months, looking for the right interpreter. He resolved to
postpone the completion of the big picture till he had finished a
five-reel idyl for the apotheosis of Kedzie.

"The backers of the enterprise will have apoplexy when they hear
of it," he laughed. "But what do I care?"

The whole army of the studio stood meanwhile at ease, drawing salary
and waiting for Ferriday to remember his day's program and give the
order to go ahead. But he was busy with his new story, in the throes
of nympholepsy, seeing visions, hearing voices.

Kedzie sat in a marble expectancy, Galatea watching Pygmalion
create her and prepare to bring her to life. She had never lived.
She realized that. All her previous existence had been but blind
gropings in the womb of time.

The backers came to remind Ferriday that there was waiting a costly
mob of actors, wooed from the speaking drama by trebled salaries.
Ferriday howled to them to get out. They did not respect his
inspirations; they suspected his motives toward Kedzie.

But Ferriday was deep in love with his art; he was panting with
the afflation of Apollo. Old motives, old scenes, old characters
that had served as "sure-fire stuff" since the earliest Hindu drama
now fell into their ancient places and he thought them new. Kedzie
was sure she had never heard such original ideas. Her gratitude to
Ferriday was absolute. And he was clever enough, or crazy enough,
to say that he was grateful to her. He had been looking for just
Her, and she had come to him just in time. He made her promises
that Solomon could not have made to Sheba, or Shakespeare to the
dark lady.

Solomon could offer to his visitor Ophirian wealth, and Shakespeare
could guarantee with some show of success (up to date) that his
words of praise would outlive all other monuments. But Ferriday
did not offer Kedzie minerals or adjectives. He cried:

"Little girl, I'll put you on a girdle of films that will encircle
the world. Your smile will run round the globe like the sun, and
light up dark places in Africa. Your tears will shower the earth.
People in thousands of towns will watch your least gesture with
anxiety. Queens will have you brought to their palaces to make them
laugh and cry. The soldiers of the world will call you their mascot
and write love-letters to you from the trenches. I will have a
billion pictures made of you, and you shall breathe and move in all
of them. You shall live a million lives at once. I will have your
other self placed in museums so that centuries from now they can
take you out and bring you to life again."

It was a mighty good speech. It would be hard to find a serenade
to beat it. And he read it superbly. He had sung it to every one
of his only girls in the world, his eternal (pro tem.) passions.
He had had about nineteen muses already.

Kedzie did not know this, of course. And it would not have mattered
much. Better the nine-and-ninetieth muse to such a man than the
first and final gas-stove slave of a Tommie Gilfoyle.

Kedzie sat in the state of nerves of a little girl alone on a
mountain-top with lightning shimmering and striking all round her.
She was so happy, so full of electrical sparks, that she was fairly
incandescent. As she said afterward, she felt "all lit up."

Ferriday spun out the plot of his new five-reel scenario until he
was like an unreeled spider. He was all out. The mechanical details
interested and refreshed him now. He must order the studio scenery
and select the outdoor "locations." He must pick the supporting cast
and devise one or two blood-curdling moments of great peril.

Kedzie was too excited to note the ghoulish joy with which he
planned to put her into the most perilous plights that had ever
threatened even a movie star with death or crippledom.

"Do they scare you, my dear?" he asked.

"Scare me?" said Kedzie. "Why, Mr. Ferriday, if you told me to,
I'd go out to the Bronx Zoo-ological Gardens and bite the ear off
the biggest lion they got in the lion-house."

Ferriday reached out, put his arm about her farther shoulder, and
squeezed her to him after the manner of dosing an accordeon. Kedzie
emitted the same kind of squeak. But she was not unhappy, and she
did not even say, "Sir!"

The plot of The Kedziad was to be based on the From-Rags-to-Riches
_leitmotiv_, Kedzie was to be a cruelly treated waif brought up
as a boy by a demoniac Italian padrone who made her steal. She was
to be sent into a rich man's home to rob it. She would find the rich
man about to commit suicide all over his sumptuous library. She
would save him, and he would save her from the padrone's revenge,
on condition that she should dress as a girl (he had not, of course,
suspected that she really was one at the time--had always been one,
in fact). She would dress as a girl and conduct a very delicate
diplomatic mission with a foreign ambassador, involving a submarine
wrecked (in the studio tank) and a terrific ride across one of
the deadliest battle-fields of Verdun (New Jersey) with a vast army
of three hundred supers.

When Kedzie had saved two or three nations and kept the United
States from war the millionaire would regret that she was, after
all, only a boy and be overcome with rapture when she told him the
truth. The three hundred supers would then serve as wedding-guests
in the biggest church wedding ever pulled off.

Kedzie liked this last touch immensely. It would make up for that
disgusting guestless ceremony in the Municipal Building.

Ferriday got rid of her exquisitely by writing a note and saying
to her:

"Now you run down and hop into my car and take this note to Lady
Powell-Carewe--don't fail to call her 'Pole Cary.' She is to design
your wealthy wardrobe, and I want her to study you and do something
unheard of in novelty and beauty. Tell her that the more she spends
the better I'll like it."

Kedzie was really a heroine. She did not swoon even at that.

When Ferriday dismissed her he enfolded her to his beautiful
waistcoat, and then held her off by her two arms and said:

"Little girl, you've made me so happy! So happy! Ah! We'll do great
things together! This is a red-letter day for the movie art."

Kedzie never feared that it might have a scarlet-letter significance.
She forgot that she was anything but a newborn, full-fledged angel
without a past--only a future with the sky for its limit. Alas! we
always have our pasts. Even the unborn babe has already centuries
of a past.

It was Ferriday who brought Kedzie home to hers.

"What about dinner to-night, my dear? I feel like having a wonderful
dinner to-night! Are partridge in season now? What is your favorite
sherry? Let me call for you at, say, seven. Where shall I call?"

Kedzie flopped back from the empyrean to her flat. Gilfoyle again
blockaded her.

She nearly swooned then. Her soul rummaged frantically through a
brain like her own work-basket. She finally dug up an excuse.

"I'd rather meet you at the restaurant."

Ferriday smiled. He understood. The poor thing was ashamed of her
boarding-house.

"Well, Cinderella, let me send my pumpkin for you, at least. I won't
come. Where shall my chauffeur find you?"

Kedzie whimpered the shabby number of the shabby street.

"Shall he ask for Miss Adair, or--"

Kedzie was inspired: "I live in Mrs. Gilfoyle's flat-partment."

"I see," said Ferriday. "Miss Anita Adair--ring Mrs. Gilfoyle's
bell. All right, my angel, at seven. Run along."

He kissed her, and she was ice-cold. But then women were often
like that before Ferriday's genius.




CHAPTER VIII

The things we are ashamed of are an acid test of our souls. Kedzie
Thropp was constantly improving the quality of her disgusts.

A few months ago she was hardly ashamed of sleeping under a park
bench. And already here she was sliding through the street in
a limousine. It was a shabby limousine, but she was not yet ready
to be ashamed of any limousine. She was proud to have it lent to
her, proud to know anybody who owned such a thing.

What she was ashamed of now was the home it must take her to and
the jobless husband waiting for her there. She was ashamed of
herself for tying up with a husband so soon. She had married in
haste and repented in haste. And there was a lot of leisure for
more repentance.

Already her husband was such a handicap that she had refrained
from mentioning his existence to the great moving-picture director
who had opened a new world of glory to her--thrown on a screen,
as it were, a cinemation of her future, where triumphs followed
one another with moving-picture rapidity. He had made a scenario
of her and invited her to dinner.

She smiled a little at the inspiration that had saved her from
confessing that she was Mrs. Gilfoyle. It was neat of her to tell
Mr. Ferriday that she could be addressed "in care of Mrs. Gilfoyle."
In care of herself! That was just what she was. Who else was so
interested in Kedzie's advancement as Kedzie?

She was a bitterly disappointed Kedzie just now. Ferriday had told
her to go to Lady Powell-Carewe and get herself a bevy of specially
designed gowns at the expense of the firm. There was hardly a woman
alive who would not have rejoiced at such a mission. To Kedzie, who
had never had a gown made by anything higher than a sewing-woman,
the privilege was heavenly. Also, she had never met a Lady with
a capital L.

The dual strain might have been the death of her, but she was saved
by the absence of Lady Powell-Carewe. Kedzie went back to the street,
sick with deferred hope. Ferriday's chauffeur was waiting to take
her home. She felt grateful for the thoughtfulness of Ferriday and
crept in.

The nearer Kedzie came to her lowly highly flat the less she wanted
even the chauffeur of Mr. Ferriday's limousine to see her enter it.
He would come for her again at night, but the building did not look
so bad at night.

So she tapped on the glass and told him to let her out, please,
at the drug-store, as she had some marketing to do.

"Sure, Miss," said the chauffeur.

Kedzie liked that "Miss." It was ever so much prettier than "Mizzuz."
She bought some postage-stamps at the drug-store and some pork chops
at the butcher's and went down the street and up the stairs to her
life-partner, dog on him!

Gilfoyle was just finishing a poem, and he was the least attractive
thing in the world to her, next to his poem. He was in his sock
feet; his suspenders were down--he would wear the hateful things!
his collar was off, his sleeves up; his detachable cuffs were
detached and stuck on the mantelpiece; his hair was crazy, and he
had ink smears on his nose.

"Don't speak to me!" he said, frantically, as he thumped the table
with finger after finger to verify the meter.

"No danger!" said Kedzie, and went into the bedroom to look over
her scant wardrobe and choose the least of its evils to wear.

She shook her head at her poverty and went to the kitchen to cook
lunch for her man. He followed her and read her his poem while she
slammed the oven door of the gas-stove at the exquisitely wrong
moments. She broke his heart by her indifference and he tore up
the poem, carefully saving the pieces.

"A whole day's work and five dollars gone!" he groaned. He was
so sulky that he forgot to ask her why she had come home so early.
He assumed that she had been turned off. She taxed her ingenuity
to devise some way of getting to the dinner with Ferriday without
letting Gilfoyle know of it. At last she made so bold as to tell her
husband that she thought she would drop in at her old boarding-house
and stay for dinner if she got asked.

"I'm sick of my cooking," she said.

"So am I, darling. Go by all means!" said Gilfoyle, who owed her one
for the poem.

Kedzie was suspicious of his willingness to let her go, but already
she had outgrown jealousy of him. As a matter of fact, he had been
invited to join a few cronies at dinner in a grimy Italian boarding-
house. They gave it a little interest by calling it a "speak-easy,"
because the proprietor sold liquor without a license. Gilfoyle's
cronies did not know of his marriage and he was sure that Kedzie
would not fit. She did not even know the names of the successful,
therefore mercenary, writers and illustrators, much less the names
of the unsuccessful, therefore artistic and sincere.

To Kedzie's delight, Gilfoyle took himself off at the end of a
perfect day of misery. He left her alone with her ambitions. She
was in very grand company. She hated the duds she had to wear, but
she solaced herself with planning what she should buy when money
was rolling in.

When Ferriday's car came for her she was standing in the doorway.
She hopped in like the Cinderella that Ferriday had called her. When
the car rolled up to the Knickerbocker Hotel she pretended that it
was her own motor.

Ferriday was standing at the curb, humbly bareheaded. He wore a
dinner-jacket and a soft hat which he tucked under his arm so that
he might clasp her hands in both of his with a costume-play fervor.
He had been an actor once--and he boasted that he had been a very
bad one.

Kedzie felt as if he were helping her from a sedan chair. She
imagined her knee skirts lengthened to a brocaded train, and his
trousers gathered up into knee breeches with silver buckles.

Bitterness came back to her as she entered the hotel and her slimpsy
little cloth gown must brush the Parisian skirts of the richly clad
other women.

She pouted in right earnest and it was infinitely becoming to her.
Ferriday was not thinking of the price or cut of her frock. He
was perceiving the flexile figure that informed it, the virginal
shoulders that curved up out of it, the slender, limber throat
that aspired from them and the flower-poise of her head on its
white stalk.

"You are perfect" he groaned into her ear, with a flattering agony
of appreciation.

That made everything all right and she did not tremble much even
before the _maitre d'hotel_. She was a trifle alarmed at the
covey of waiters who hastened to their table to pull out the chairs
and push them in and fetch the water and bread and butter and silver
and plates. She was glad to have long gloves to take off slowly while
she recovered herself and took in the gorgeous room full of gorgeous
people. Gloves are most useful coming off and going on.

Kedzie was afraid of the bill of fare with its complex French terms,
but Ferriday took command of the menu.

When he was working Ferriday could wolf a sandwich with the greed of
a busy artist and give orders with a shred of meat in one hand and
a mug of coffee in the other. But when he luxuriated he luxuriated.

Tonight he was tired of life and dejected from a battle with the
stingy backers, who had warned him for the last time once more
that he had to economize. He needed to forget such people and
the loathsome enemy of fancy, economy.

"I want to order something as exquisite as you are," he said.
"Of course, there could be nothing as exquisite as you are, Miss
Adair--you were curled up on a silver dish with a little apple
in your mouth like a young roast pig. Ever read Lamb on pig?"

Kedzie laughed with glancing tintinnabulations as if one tapped
a row of glasses with a knife.

Ferriday sighed. He saw that she had never heard of Lamb and thought
he was perpetrating an ancient pun. But he did not like bookish women
and he often said that nothing was more becoming to a woman than
ignorance. They should have wisdom, but no learning.

Ferriday was one of those terrifying persons who know, or pretend
to know, curious secrets about restaurants and their resources.
Wine-cellars and the individualities of chefs had no terror for
him so far as she could see. He expressed contempt for apparent
commonplaces that Kedzie had never heard of. He used French words
with an accent that Kedzie supposed to be perfect.

The waiters knew that he did not know much and had merely picked up
a smattering of dining-room lore, but they humored his affectations.
And of all affectations, what is more futile than the printing of
American bills of fare in French?

"Would you prefer the Astrakhan caviar?" he began on Kedzie, "or
some or-durv? The caviar here is fairly trustworthy."

Kedzie shrugged her perfectly accented shoulders in a cowardly
evasion, and he ordered the first caviar Kedzie had ever eaten.
It looked as if it came from a munitions-factory, but she liked it
immensely, especially as a side-long glance at the bill of fare told
her that it cost one dollar and twenty-five cents per person.

Next he proposed either a potage madrilene or a creme de volaille,
Marie Louise.

Kedzie chose the latter because it was the latter. She mumbled:

"I think a little cremmy vly Marie Louisa would be nice."

She was amazed to find later how much it tasted like chicken soup.

"We don't want any fish, do we?" Ferriday moaned. "Or do we? They
don't really understand the supreme de sole a la Verdi here, so
suppose we skip to the roast, unless you would risk the aigulette
de pompano, Coquelin. The last time I had a troncon de saumon here
I had to send it back."

Kedzie said, "Let's skip."

She shuddered. The word reminded her, as always, of Skip Magruder.
She remembered how he had hung over the table that far-away morning
and recommended ham 'n'eggs. His dirty shirt-sleeves and his grin
came back to her now. The gruesome Banquo reminded her so vividly
of her early guilt of plebeiancy that she shivered. The alert
Ferriday noticed it and called:

"Have that window closed at once. There's an infernal draught here."

Kedzie was thrilled at his autocratic manner. He scared off the ghost
of Magruder.

Ferriday pondered aloud the bill of fare as if it were the plot of
a new feature film.

"Capon en casserole, milk-fed guinea-hen escoffier, plover en
cocotte, English golden pheasant, partridge--do any of those
tiresome things interest you?"

It was like asking her whether she would have a Gorham tea-set,
a Balcom gown, or a Packard landaulet. She wanted them all.

But her eyes caught the prices. Four dollars for an English pheasant!
No wonder they called it golden. It seemed a shame, though, to stick
such a nice man, after he had already ordered two dollars and a
half's worth of caviar.

She chose the cheapest thing. She was already falling in love
with Ferriday.

The plover was only a dollar. She was not quite sure what kind of
animal it would turn out to be. She had a womanly intuition that it
was a fowl of some breed. She wanted to know. She had come to the
stomach school.

"I think I'll take a bit of the plover," she said.

"Nice girl!" thought Ferriday, who recognized her vicarious economy.

"Plover it is," he said to the waiter, and added, "tell Pierre it's
for me and he'd better not burn it again."

The waiter was crushed by Pierre's lapse, especially as the chef's
name was Achille.

Ferriday went on: "With the plover we might have some champignons
frais sous cloche and a salade de laitue avec French dressing,
yes? Then a substantial sweet: a coupe aux marrons or a nesselrode
pudding, yes?"

Kedzie wanted to ask for a plain, familiar vanilla ice-cream, but
she knew better. She ordered the nesselrode--and got her ice-cream,
after all. There were chestnuts in it, too--so she was glad she
had not selected the coupe aux marrons.

Ferriday did not take a sweet, but had a cheese instead, after an
anxious debate with the waiter about the health of the Camembert
and the decadence of the Roquefort. When this weighty matter was
settled he returned to Kedzie:

"Now for something to drink. A little sherry and bitters to begin
with, of course; and a--oh, umm, let me see--simple things are best;
suppose we stick to champagne." He called it "shah pine," according
to Kedzie's ear, but she hoped he meant shampane. She had always
wanted to taste "wealthy water," as Gilfoyle called it, but never
called for it.

Kedzie was a trifle alarmed when Ferriday said: "I hope you don't
like it sweet. It can't be too dry for me."

"Me, either," Kedzie assured him--and made a face implying that she
always took it in the form of a powder.

Ferriday smiled benignly and said to the waiter: "You might bring us
een boo-tay de Bollinger Numero--er--katter--vang--kanz." He knew
that the French for ninety-five was four-twenties-fifteen, but the
waiter could not understand till he placed his finger on the number
with his best French accent. He saved himself from collapse by a
stern post-dictum:

"Remember, it's the vintage of nineteen hundred. If you bring that
loathsome eighteen ninety-three I'll have to crack the bottle over
your head. You wouldn't want that, would you?"

"_Non, m'zoo, oui, monzoo_," said the German waiter.

"Then we'll have some black coffee and a liqueur--a Curacao, say,
or a green Chartreuse, or a white mint. Which?"

Naturally Kedzie said the white mint, please.

With that Ferriday released the waiter, who hurried away, hoping
that Ferriday's affectations included extravagant tips.

Kedzie gobbled prettily the food before her. Ferriday could tell that
she was anxiously watching and copying his methods of attack. He soon
knew that this was her first real meal _de luxe_, but he did not
mind that. Columbus was not angry at America because it had never
seen an explorer before.

It delighted Ferriday to think that he had discovered Kedzie. He
would say later that he invented her. And she wanted tremendously
to be discovered or invented or anything else, by anybody who could
find a gold-mine in her somewhere and pay her a royalty on her own
mineral wealth.

When her lips met the shell-edge of the champagne-glass and the
essence of all mischief flung its spray against the tip of her
cleverly whittled nose she winced at first. But she went boldly
back, and soon the sprites that rained upward in her glass were
sending tiny balloons of hope through her brain. They soared past
her small skull and her braided hair and the crown of her hat and
on up through the ceiling, and none of them broke--as yet.

Her soul was pleasantly a-simmer now and she could not tell whether
the wine made her exultant or she the wine. But she was sure that
she had at last discovered her life.

And with it all she was dreadfully canny. She was only a little
village girl unused to city ways, and the handsome city stranger
was plying her with wine; but she was none of your stencil figures
that blot romance.

Kedzie was thinking over the cold, hard precepts that women acquire
somehow. She was resolving that since she was to be as great as he
said she should be, she must not cheapen herself now.

Many of these little village girls have come to town since time
was and brought with them the level heads of icily wise women who
make love a business and not a folly. Many men are keeping sober
mainly nowadays because it is good business; many women pure for
the same reason.

Turkish sultans as fierce as Suleiman the Magnificent have bought
country girls kidnapped by slave-merchants and have bought tyrants
in the bargain. Ferriday the Magnificent was playing with holocaust
when he set a match to Kedzie.

But now she was an attractive little flame and he watched her soul
flicker and gave it fuel. He also gave it a cigarette; at least he
proffered her his silver case, but she shook her head.

"Why not?" he asked. "All the women, old and young, are smoking
here."

She tightened her plump lips and answered, "I don't like 'em; and
they give me the fidgets."

"You'll do!" he cried, softly, reaching out and clenching her
knuckles in his palm a moment. "You're the wise one! I felt sure
that pretty little face of yours was only a mask for the ugliest
and most valuable thing a woman can possess."

"What's that?" said Kedzie, hoping he was not going to begin big
talk.

"Wisdom," said Ferriday. "A woman ought to be as wise as the serpent,
but she ought to have the eyes of a dove. Your baby sweetness is
worth a fortune on the screen if you have brains enough to manage
it, and I fancy you have. Here's to you, Miss Anita Adair!"

He drank deep, but she only touched the brim. She saw that he was
drinking too much--he had had several cocktails while he waited
for her to arrive. Kedzie felt that one of the two must keep a clear
head. She found that ice-water was a good antidote for champagne.

When Ferriday sharply ordered the waiter to look to her glass she
shook her head. When he finished the bottle and the waiter put it
mouth down in the ice as an eloquent reminder Ferriday accepted
the challenge and ordered another bottle. He was just thickened
of tongue enough to say "boddle."

Kedzie spoke, quickly: "Please, no. I must go home. It's later than
I thought, and--"

"And Mrs. Gilfoyle will wonder," Ferriday laughed. "That's right,
my dear. You've got to keep good hours if you are going to succeethe
on the screen. Early to bed, for you must early-to-rise. _Garcon,
garcon, l'addition, s'il vous_ please."

While he was paying the bill Kedzie was thinking fleetly of her next
problem. He would want to take her home in his car, and it would be
just her luck to find her husband on the door-step. In any case, she
was afraid that Ferriday would be sentimental and she did not want
Ferriday to be sentimental just yet. And she would not tolerate
a sentiment inspired or influenced by wine. Love from a bottle is
the poorest of compliments.

Already she was a little disappointed in Ferriday. He was a great
man, but he had his fault, and she had found him out. If he were
going to be of use to her she must snub that vinous phase at once.

The cool air outside seemed to gratify Ferriday and he took off his
hat while the carriage-starter whistled up his car. Now Kedzie said:

"Please, Mr. Ferriday, just put me in a taxicab."

"Nonsense! I'll take you home. I'll certainly take you home."

"No, please; it's 'way out of your way, and I--I'd rather--really
I would."

Ferriday stared hard at her as if she were just a trifle blurred.
He frowned; then he smiled.

"Why, bless your soul, if you'd rather I wouldn't oppose you, I
wouldn't--not for worlds. But you sha'n't go home in any old cabby
taxishab; you'll take my wagon and I'll walk. The walk will do me
good."

Kedzie thought it would, too, so she consented with appropriate
reluctance. He lifted her in and closed the door--then leaned in
to laugh:

"Give my love to old Mrs. Gilfoyle. And don't fail to be at the
shudio bright and early. We'll have to make sun while the hay
shines, you know. Good night, Miss Adair!"

"Good night, Mr. Ferriday, and thank you ever so much for the
perfectly lovely evening."

"It has been l-l-lovely. Goo-ood night!"

The car swept away and made a big turn. She saw Ferriday marching
grandiosely along the street, with his head bared to the cool
moonlight. She settled back and snuggled into the cushions,
imagining the car her very own.

She left her glory behind her as she climbed the long stairs,
briskly preparing her lies and her defensive temper for her
husband's wrathful greeting.

He was not there.




CHAPTER IX

Kedzie had no sooner rejoiced in the fortunate absence of her
husband than she began to worry because he was away. Where was he
and with whom? She sat by the window and looked up and down the
street, but she could find none among the pedestrians who looked
like her possessor. She forgot him in the beauty of the town--all
black velvet and diamonds.

Once more she sat with her window open toward her Jerusalem and
worshiped the holy city of her desire. That night at the Biltmore
she was an ignorant country-town girl who had never had anything.
Now she had had a good deal, including a husband. But, strangely,
there was just as much to long for as before--more, indeed, for
she knew more things to want.

As the scientist finds in every new discovery a new dark continent,
in each atom a universe, so Kedzie found from each acquired desire
infinite new desires radiating fanwise to the horizon and beyond.

At first she had wanted to know the town--now she wanted to be known
by the town. Then her father stood in her way; now, her husband. She
had eloped from her parents with ease and they had never found her
again. She had succeeded in being lost.

She did not want to be lost any more; but she was lost, utterly
nobody to anybody that mattered. Now was her chance, but she could
not run away from her husband and get famous without his finding her.
If he found her he would spoil her fun and her fame. She did not
know how many public favorites are married, how many matinee idols
are managed by their wives. She had never heard of the prima donna's
husband.

She fell asleep among her worries. She was awakened by the noisy
entrance of her spouse. He was hardly recognizable. She thought
at first that her eyes were bleary with sleep, but it was his face
that was bleary. He was what a Flagg caricature of him would be,
with the same merciless truth in the grotesque.

Kedzie had never seen him boozy before. She groaned, expressively,
"My Gawd! you're pie-eyed."

He sang an old song, "The girl guessed right the very first time,
very firstime, verfirstime."

He tried to take her into his arms. She slapped his hands away. He
laughed and flopped into a chair, giggling. She studied him with
almost more interest than repugnance. He was idiotically jovial,
as sly as an idiot and as inscrutable.

Without waiting to be asked he began a recital of his chronicles.
He was as evidently concealing certain things as boasting of others.
Kedzie rather hoped he had done something to conceal, since that
would be an atonement for her own subtleties.

"I have been in Bohemia," he said, "zhenuine old Bohemia where hearts
are true and eyes are blue and ev'body loves ev'body else. Down
there a handclasp is a pledzh of loyalty. There's no hypocrisy
in Bohemia--not a dambit. No, sirree. The idle rish with their
shnobberies and worship of mere--mere someshing or oth' have no
place in Bohemia, for in Bohemia hearsh are true and wine is blue
and--"

"Oh, shut up!" said Kedzie.

"Thass way you're always repressin' me. You're a hopeless
Philisterine. But I have no intentions of shuttin' up, my darlin'
Anita--Anita--Shh! shh!"

He was hushing himself. He was very patently remembering something
and conspicuously warning himself not to divulge it. Kedzie loathed
him too much to care. Now that he was safely housed he ceased to
interest her. She went to bed. He spiraled into a chair to meditate
his wickedness. He felt that he was as near to being a hypocrite
as was possible in Bohemia.

He had met two talented ladies at the dinner, one was a sculptress
from Mr. Samuel Merwin's Washington Square and the other was a
paintress from Mr. Owen Johnson's Lincoln Square. Neither lady
had had any work accepted by the Academy or bought by a dealer.
Both were consequently as fierce against intrenched art as Gilfoyle
was against intrenched capital and literature.

They were there in the company of two writers. One of these could not
get anything published at all except in the toy magazines, which paid
little and late and died early. The other writer could get published,
but not sold. Both were young and needed only to pound their irons
on the anvil to get them hot, but they blamed the world for being
cold to true art. In time they would make the sparks fly and would
be in their turn assailed as mere blacksmiths by the next line of
younger apprentices. They were at present in the same stage as any
other new business--they were building up custom in a neighborhood
of strangers.

But at present they were suppressed, all four, men and women;
suppressed and smothered as next June's flowers and weeds are held
back by the conspiracy of December's snows and the harsh criticisms
of March.

The sculptress's first name was Marguerite and Gilfoyle longed to
call her by it, after his second goblet of claret-and-water. He had
a passion for first names. He had the quick enthusiasm of a lawyer
or an advertising-man for a new client. Before he quite realized
the enormity of his perfidy he was pretending to compose a poem to
Marguerite. He wrote busily on an old bill of fare which had already
been persecuted by an artist or two. And he wrote his Anita poem
over again in Marguerite's honor, _mutatis mutandis_.

  Pretty maid, pretty maid, may I say Marguerita?
  Your last name is sweet, but your first name is sweeter.

And so on to the bitter end.

He slipped the lyric to Marguerite and she read it with squeals of
delight, while Gilfoyle looked as modest as such a genius could.
The other girl had to read it, of course, while Gilfoyle tried to
look unconscious. He was as successful as one is who tries to hold
a casual expression for a photograph.

The other girl's reward was a shrug and the diluted claret of
a "Very nice!" Gilfoyle said, "You're no judge or else you're
jealous." The two men read it, and said, "Mush!" and "Slushgusher!"
but Marguerite's eyes belonged to Gilfoyle the rest of the evening,
also her hands now and then.

Remembering this, Gilfoyle was uneasy. One ought to be careful to
keep an aseptic memory at home. Yet if this was not infidelity, what
would be? In a rich man Gilfoyle would have called it a typical
result of the evil influence of wealth. In the absence of wealth it
was a gay little Pierrot-perfidy of the _vie de Boheme_. Still,
poets have to be like that. An actor must make love to whatever
leading lady confronts him, and so must poets, the lawyers and press
agents of love.

But when he got home Gilfoyle repented as he remembered. He suffered
on a rack of guilty bliss, but he managed to hold back the secret
which was bubbling up in him with a bromo-seltzer effervescence.
Incidentally his "pretty maid, pretty maid, Marguerite" had kept
back the fact that she had a husband in the hardware business in
Terre Haute. What the husband was keeping back is none of this
history's business.

It was all as old and unoriginal as original sin. The important thing
to Kedzie was the fact that shortly after the poem had been revamped
a stranger had joined, first in song with Gilfoyle's table-load and
then in conversation. He had ended by introducing his companion and
bringing her over. Had it not been for the fine democracy of Bohemia
they would have cut the creature dead. She was a buyer, one of Miss
Ferber's Emma McChesneys on a lark.

Gilfoyle did not tell Kedzie any of this. He told what followed as
he toiled at the fearfully complicated problem of his shoe-laces,
a problem rendered almost insuperable by the fact that he could not
hold his foot high very long and dared not hold his head low at all.

"Wonnerful thing happent t'night, Anita. Just shows you never know
where your lucksh goin' to hit you. I'm down there with--er--er--
couple of old frensh, you know, and who comes over to our table but
big feller from out Wesh--Chicago--Chicago--Gobbless Ch'cag! His name
is entitled Deshler. In coursh conv'sation I mention Breathasweeta
Shewing Gum--see?--he says he knew that gum and he'd sheen the
advershments, bes' ol' ad-vershments ever sheen, thass what Mr.
Beshler said and I'm not lyin' to you, Anita. No, sir.

"Whereupon--whereupon I modesly remark, 'Of course they're clever
--nashurally they're clever, because they were written by l'i'l
Mr. ME!' He says, 'You really wrote 'em?' and I say, 'I roally
wretem!' And Mr. Keshler says, 'Well, I'll be g'dam'.' Then he
says, 'Who coined that name Breathasweeta?' And I says, 'I did!'
and he says, 'Well, I'll be g'dam'!'

"Anyway, to make long shory stort, Mr. Nestor he says, 'What you
doin' now? Writen copy for the Kaiser or the K-zar?' and I says,
'I am a gen'leman of leisure,' and he says, 'There's a good job
waitin' fer lad your size out in Ch'cag! Would you come 'way out
there?' and I says, 'I fear nothing!'

"So Mr. Zeisselberg wrote his name on a card, and if I haven't los'
card, or he doesn't change his old mind, I am now Mr. John J. Job
of Chicago. And now I got a unsolishited posish--imposishible
solishion--solution--unpolusion solishible--you know what I mean.
So kiss me!"

Kedzie escaped the kiss, but she asked, with a sleepy eagerness,
"Did you tell him you were married?"

"Nashurly not, my dear. It was stric'ly business conv'sation.
I didn' ask him how many shildren he had and he didn' ask me if
I was a Benedictine or a--or a pony of brandy--thass pretty good.
Hope I can rememmer it to-mor'."

Kedzie smiled, but not at his boozy pun. She seemed more comfortable.
She fell asleep. Next to being innocent, being absolved is the most
soothing of sensations.




CHAPTER X

The next morning that parrot, still unmurdered, woke Kedzie early.
She buried one ear deep in the pillow and covered the other with
her hair and her hand. The parrot's voice receded to a distance,
but a still smaller voice began to call to her. She was squirming
deeper for a long snooze when her foot struck another.

Her husband!--King Log, audibly a-slumber. She pouted drowsily,
frowned, slid away, and tried to commit temporary suicide by
drowning herself in sleep.

Then her stupor faded as the tiny call resounded again in her soul.
She was no longer merely Mrs. Anita Gilfoyle, the flat-dwelling
nobody. She was now Anita Adair, the screen-queen. She was needed
at the studio.

She sat up, looked at her husband, her unacknowledged and
unacknowledging husband. A mysterious voice drew her from his side
as cogently as the hand of Yahweh drew the rib that became a woman
from under the elbow of Adam.

She rose and looked back and down at the man whom the law had united
her with indissolubly. Eve must have wondered back at Adam with
the same sense of escape while he lay asleep. According to one of
the conflicting legends of the two gods of Genesis, woman was then
actually one with man. Marriage has ever since been an effort to
put her back among his ribs, but she has always refused to be
intercostal. It is an ancient habit to pretend that she is, and
sometimes she pretends to snuggle into place. Yet she has never been,
can never be, re-ribbed--especially not since marriage is an attempt
to fit her into the anatomy of an Adam who is always, in a sense,
a stranger to her.

Kedzie gazed on her Adam with a sense of departure, of farewell.
She felt a trifle sorry for Gilfoyle, and the moment she resolved
to quit him he became a little more attractive.

There was something pitiful about his helpless sprawl: his very
awkwardness endeared him infinitesimally. She nearly felt that
tenderness which good wives and fond mothers feel for the gawky
creatures they hallow with their devotion.

Kedzie leaned forward to kiss the poor wretch good-by, but,
unfortunately (or fortunately), a restlessness seized him, he
rolled over on his other side, and one limp, floppy hand struck
Kedzie on the nose.

She sprang back with a gasp of pain and hurried away, feeling
abused and exiled.

At the studio she was received by Garfinkel with distinction.
Ferriday came out to meet her with a shining morning face and led
her to the office of the two backers.

A contract was waiting for her and the pen and ink were handy. Kedzie
had never seen a contract before and she was as afraid of this one
as if it were her death warrant. It was her life warrant, rather.
She tried to read it as if she had signed dozens of contracts, but
she fooled nobody. She could not make head or tail of "the party of
the first part" and the terms exacted of movie actors. She understood
nothing but the salary. One hundred dollars a week! That bloomed like
a rose in the crabbed text. She would have signed almost anything
for that.

The deed was finally done. Her hundred-odd pounds of flesh belonged
to the Hyperfilm Company. The partners gave her their short, warm
hands. Ferriday wrung her palm with his long, lean fingers. Then he
caught her by the elbow and whisked her into his studio. He began
to describe her first scene in the big production. The backers had
insisted that she prove her ability as a minor character in a play
featuring another woman. Kedzie did not mind, especially when
Ferriday winked and whispered: "We'll make you make her look like
something the cat brought in. First of all, those gowns of yours--"

She had told him of her ill luck the day before in finding Lady
Powell-Carewe out. He sent her flying down again in his limousine.
She stepped into it now with assurance. It was beginning to be
her very own. At least she was beginning to own the owner.

She felt less excitement about the ride now that it was not her
first. She noticed that the upholstery was frayed in spots. Other
cars passed hers. The chauffeur was not so smart as some of the
drivers. And he was alone. On a few of the swagger limousines there
were two men in livery on the box. She felt rather ashamed of having
only one.

Her haughty discontent fell from her when she arrived at Lady
Powell-Carewe's shop. She wished she had not come alone. She did
not know how to behave. And what in Heaven's name did you call
her--"Your Ladyship" or "Your Majesty" or what?

She walked in so meekly and was so simply clad that nobody in
the place paid any heed to her at first. It was a very busy place,
with girls rushing to and fro or sauntering limberly up and down
in tremendously handsome gowns.

Kedzie could not pick out Lady Powell-Carewe. One of the promenaders
was so tall and so haughty that Kedzie thought she must be at least
a "Lady." She was in a silvery, shimmery green-and-gray gown, and
the man whom the customers called "Mr. Charles" said:

"Madame calls this the Blown Poplar. Isn't it bully?"

Kedzie caught Mr. Charles's eye. He spoke to her sharply:

"Well?"

He evidently thought her somebody looking for a job as bundle-carrier.
She was pretty, but there were tons of pretty girls. They bored Mr.
Charles to death. He had a whole beagle-pack of them to care for.

Kedzie poked at him Ferriday's letter of introduction addressed to
Lady Powell-Carewe. Mr. Charles took it and, not knowing what it
contained, bore it into the other room without asking Kedzie to
sit down.

He reappeared at the door and bowed to her with great amazement. She
slipped into a chaotic room where there were heaps of fabrics thrown
about like rubbish, long streamers of samples littering a desk full
of papers.

A sumptuous creature of stately manner bowed creakily to Kedzie,
and Kedzie said, trying to remember the pronunciation:

"Lady Pole-Carrier?"

A little plainly dressed woman replied: "Yes, my child. So you're
the Adair thing that Ferriday is gone half-witted over. He's just
been talking my ear off about you. Sit down. Stop where you are.
Let me see you. Turn around. I see." She turned to the stately dame.
"Rather nice, isn't she, Mrs. Congdon? H'mm!" She beckoned Kedzie
to come close. "What are your eyes like?" She lorgnetted the
terrified girl, as if she were a throat-specialist. "Take off that
horrid hat. Let me see your hair. H'mm! Rather nice hair, isn't it,
Mrs. Congdon?--that is, if she knew how to do it. Let me see. Yes,
I get your color, but it will be a job to suit you and that infernal
movie-camera. It kills my colors so! I have to keep remembering that
crimson photographs black and cream is dirty, and blue and yellow
are just nothing."

Mr. Charles came in to say that Mrs. Noxon was outside. Kedzie
recognized the great name with terror. Lady Powell-Carewe snapped:

"Tell the old camel I'm ill. I can't see her to-day. I'm ill to
everybody to-day. I've taken a big job on."

This was sublime. To have aristocrats turned away for her!

While Madame prowled among the fabrics and bit her lorgnon in
study, Kedzie looked over the big albums filled with photographs
of the creations of the great creatrix. For Lady Powell-Carewe was
a creative artist, taking her ideas where she found them in art
or nature, and in revivals and in inventions. She took her color
schemes from paintings, old and new, from jewels, landscapes. It
was said that she went to Niagara to study the floods of color that
tumble over its brink.

She began to interest herself in Kedzie, to wish to accomplish more
than the mere selling of dress goods made up. She decided to create
Kedzie as well as her clothes.

"Do you wear that pout all the time?" she asked.

"Do I pout?" Kedzie asked, in an amazement.

"Don't pretend that you don't know it and do it intentionally. Also
why do you Americans always answer a question by asking another?"

"Do we?" said Kedzie.

Lady Powell-Carewe decided that Kedzie was as short on brains as
she was long on looks. But it was the looks that Lady Powell-Carewe
was going to dress, and not the brains.

She ordered Kedzie to spend a lot of money having her hair cared
for expertly.

She tried various styles on Kedzie, ordering her to throw off her
frock and stand in her combination while Mrs. Congdon and Mr.
Charles brought up armloads of silks and velvets and draped them
on Kedzie as if she were a clothes-horse.

The feel of the crisp and whispering taffetas, the elevation of
the brocades, the warm nothingness of the chiffons like wisps
of fog, the rich dignity of the cloths, gave Kedzie rapture on
rapture. Standing there with a burden of fabrics upon her and Lady
Powell-Carewe kneeling at her feet pinning them up and tucking them
here and there, Kedzie was reminded of those ancient days of six
months gone when her mother used to kneel about her and fit on her
the home-made school-dress cut according to Butterick patterns.
Now Kedzie had a genuine Lady at her feet. It was a triumph indeed.
It was not hard now to believe that she would have all the world
at her feet one day.

Lady Powell-Carewe used Kedzie's frame as a mere standard to fly
banners from. Leaving the head and shoulders to stand out like
the wax bust of a wistful doll, she started a cloud of fabric
about her in the most extravagant fashion. She reined it in sharply
at the waist, but again it flared to such distances on all sides that
Kedzie could never have sailed through any door but that of a garage
without compression.

On this vast bell of silk she hung streamers of rosettes, flowers of
colors that would have been strident if they had been the eighteenth
of a shade stronger. As it was, they were as delicious as cream
curdled in a syrup of cherries. The whole effect would have been
burlesque if it had not been the whim of a brilliant taste. Men
would look it at and say, "Good Lord!" Women would murmur, enviously,
"Oh, Lord!" Kedzie's soul expanded to the ultimate fringe of the
farthest furbelow.

When the fantasy was assured Lady Powell-Carewe had Kedzie extracted
from it. Then pondering her sapling slenderness, once more she caught
from the air an inspiration. She would incase Kedzie in a sheath of
soft, white kid marked with delicate lines and set off with black
gloves and a hat of green leaves. And this she would call "The White
Birch."

And that was all the creating she felt up to for the day. She had
Kedzie's measure taken in order to have a slip made as a model
for use in the hours when Kedzie should be too busy to stand
for fitting.

It was well for Kedzie that there was a free ride waiting for her.
Her journey to the studio was harrowed by the financial problem
which has often tortured people in limousines. She did not like to
ask Mr. Ferriday for money in advance. He might think she was poor.
There is nothing that bankrupts the poor so much as the effort to
look unconcerned while they wait for their next penny.

Kedzie was frantic with worry and was reduced to prayer. "O Lord,
send me some money somehow." The number of such prayers going up
to heaven must cause some embarrassment, since money can usually
be given to one person only by taking it from another--and that
other is doubtless praying for more at the very moment.

To Kedzie's dismay, when she arrived at the studio and asked for
Mr. Ferriday, Mr. Garfinkel appeared. He was very deferential, but
he was, after all, only a Garfinkel and she needed a Ferriday. He
explained that his chief was very busy and had instructed Garfinkel
to teach Miss Adair the science of make-up for the camera, to take
test pictures of her, and give her valuable hints in lens behavior.

Late in the afternoon Ferriday came in to see the result of the
first lesson. He said, "Much obliged, Garfinkel" and Garfinkel
remembered pressing duty elsewhere.

His departure left Kedzie alone with Ferriday in a cavern pitch
black save for the cone of light spreading from the little hole in
the wall at the back to the screen where the spray of light-dust
became living pictures of Kedzie.

Kedzie did not know that the operator behind the wall could peek and
peer while his picture-wheel rolled out the cataract of photographs.
Ferriday was careful of her--or of himself. He held her hand,
of course, and murmured to her how stunning she was, but he made
no effort to make love, to her great comfort and regret.

At length he invited her to ride home in his limousine, but he did
not invite her to dinner. She told herself that she would have had
to decline. But she would have liked to be asked.

While he rhapsodized once more about her future she was thinking of
her immediate penury. As she approached the street of her residence
she realized that she must either starve till pay-day or borrow.
It was a bad beginning, but better than a hopeless ending. After
several gasps of hesitation she finally made her plea:

"I'm awfully sorry to have to trouble you, Mr. Ferriday, but
I'm--Well, could you lend me twenty-five dollars?"

"My dear child, take fifty," he cried.

She shook her head, but it hurt her to see the roll of bills he
dived for and brought up, and the careless grace with which he
peeled two leaves from the cabbage. Easy money is always attended
with resentment that more did not come along. Kedzie pouted at her
folly in not accepting the fifty. If she had said, "Lend me fifty,"
he would have offered her a hundred. But the twenty-five was
salvation, and it would buy her food enough to keep her and her
useless husband alive, and to buy her a pair of shoes and some
gloves.

As the car drew near her corner she cried that she had some
shopping to do and escaped again at the drug-store.

She found her husband at home. There was an unwonted authority
about his greeting:

"Well, young woman, you may approach and kiss my hand. I am a
gentleman with a job. I am a Chicago gentleman with a job."

"You don't mean it!" Kedzie gasped; and kissed him from habit with
more respect than her recent habit had shown.

"I mean it," said Gilfoyle. "I am now on the staff of the Deshler
Advertising Agency. I was afraid when Mr. D. offered me an
unsolicited position (he could say it to-day) that it was the red
wine and not the real money that was talking, but he was painfully
sober this noon, took me out to lunch, and told me that he would be
proud to avail himself of my services."

"Splendid!" said Kedzie, with sincere enthusiasm. It is always
pleasant to learn that money is setting toward the family.

But something told Kedzie that her late acquisition of twenty-five
dollars would not be with her long. Easy come, easy go. "How much
is the fare to Chicago?" she asked, in a hollow voice.

"Twenty-two dollars is the fare," said Gilfoyle, "with about
eight dollars extra. I couldn't borrow a cent. I've got only
five dollars."

"I thought so," said Kedzie.

"Thought what so?" said Gilfoyle.

"Nothing," said Kedzie. "Well, I happen to have twenty-five
dollars."

"That's funny," said Gilfoyle. "Where did you get it?"

"Oh, I saved it up."

"From what?"

"Well, do you want the twenty-five, or don't you?"

Gilfoyle pondered. If he questioned the source of the money he
might find it out, and be unable to accept it. He wanted the money
more than the hazardous information; so he said:

"Of course I want the twenty-five, darling, but I hate to rob you.
Of course I'll send for you as soon as I can make a nest out there,
but how will you get along?"

"Oh, I'll get along," said Kedzie; "there'll be some movie-money
coming to me Saturday."

"Well, that's fine," Gilfoyle said, feeling a weight of horrible
guilt mingled with superior wings of relief. He hesitated, hemmed,
hawed, perspired, and finally looked to that old source of so many
escapes, his watch. "There's a train at eight-two; I could just
about make it if I scoot now."

"You'd better scoot," said Kedzie. And she gave him the money.

"I'd like to have dinner with you," Gilfoyle faltered, "but--"

"Yes, I'd like to have you, but--"

They looked at each other wretchedly. Their love was so lukewarm
already that they bothered each other. There was no impulse to
the delicious bitter-sweet of a passionate farewell. She was as
eager to have him gone as he to go, and each blamed the other
for that.

"I'll write you every day," he said, "and I'll send the fare to
you as soon as I can get it."

"Yes, of course," Kedzie mumbled. "Well, good-by--don't miss your
train, darling."

"Good-by, honey."

They had to embrace. Their arms went out about each other and
clasped behind each other's backs. Then some impulse moved them
to a fierce clench of desperate sorrow. They were embracing their
dead loves, the corpses that lay dead in these alienated bodies.
It was an embrace across a grave, and they felt the thud of clods
upon their love.

They gasped with the pity of it, and Kedzie's eyes were reeking
with tears and Gilfoyle's lips were shivering when they wrenched
out of that lock of torment.

He caught her back to him and kissed her salt-sweet mouth. Her kiss
was brackish on his lips as life was. She felt a kind of assault in
the fervor of his kiss, but she did not resist. He was a stranger
who sprang at her from the dark, but he was also very like a poet
she had loved poetically long, long ago.

Then they wrung hands and called good-bys and he caught up his
suit-case and rushed through the door.

She hung from the window to wave to him as he ran down the street
to the Subway, pausing now and again to wave to her vaguely, then
stumbling on his course.

At last she could not see him, whether for the tears or for the
distance, and she bowed her head on her lonely sill and wept.

She had a splendid cry that flushed her heart clean as a new whistle.
She washed her eyes with fine cold water and half sobbed, half
laughed, "Well, that's over."




CHAPTER XI

Charity Coe Cheever was making less progress with her amateur
movie-show than Kedzie with her professional cinematic career.

Charity telephoned to ask Jim Dyckman to act, but he proved to be
camera-shy and intractable.

She had difficulties with all her cast. It was impossible to satisfy
the people who were willing to act with the roles they were willing
to assume.

Charity was lunching at the Ritz-Carlton with Mrs. Noxon when she saw
Jim Dyckman come in with his mother. Mrs. Noxon left Charity and went
over to speak to Mrs. Dyckman. So Charity beckoned Jim over and urged
him to accept the job of impresario.

He protested, but she pleaded for his help at least on an errand
or two.

"Jim, I want you to go up to the studio of these people and find
this great man Ferriday and get him to promise to direct for us.
And by the way, that little girl you pulled out of the pool, you
know--well, they promised to get her a job at the studio. You look
her up and find out how she's doing--there's a darling."

He shook his head, resisting her for once, and answered:

"Go to the devil, Charity darling. You won't let me love you, so I'll
be cussed if I'll let you get me to working for you. I've had you bad
and I'm trying to get well of you. So let me alone."

That was how Peter Cheever, talking to the headwaiter at the head of
the stairs, saw his wife and Jim Dyckman with their heads together at
a table. He wanted to go over and crack a water-bottle over Dyckman's
head. He did not do it, for the excellent reason that Zada L'Etoile
was at his side. She had insisted on his taking her there "to lunch
with the bunch," as she expressed it.

She also saw Charity and Jim and Cheever's sudden flush of rage. She
felt that the way was opening for her dreams to come true. She was so
happy over the situation that she helped Cheever out of the appalling
problem before him.

He did not know how to go forward or how to retreat. He could think
of nothing to say to the headwaiter who offered him his choice of
tables.

Zada caught his elbow and murmured in her very best voice just loud
enough for the headwaiter's benefit:

"Mr. Cheever, I'm so sorry--but I'm feeling dizzy. I'm afraid I shall
faint if I don't get out in the air. It's very close in here."

"It is very close, madam," said the headwaiter, and he helped to
support her down the steps quietly and deferentially, just as if
he believed it.

Zada and Cheever thought they were escaping from a crisis, but they
were drifting deeper and deeper into the converging currents. When
they were safe in the motor outside Zada was proud.

"Some get-away, that?" she laughed.

"Wonderful!" said Cheever. "I didn't know you had so much social
skill."

"You don't know me," she said. "I'm learning! You'll be proud of me
yet."

"I am now," he said. "You're the most beautiful thing in the world."

"Oh, that's old stuff," she said. "Any cow can be glossy. But I'm
going in for the real thing, Peterkin. I've cut out the cocktails
and I don't dance with anybody but you lately. Have you noticed
that? It's the quiet life and the nice ways for me. Do you mind?"

"It's very becoming" he said. "Anything for a novelty."

Yet he liked her surprisingly well in this phase. She had been
cutting down his liquor, too. She had been cutting down his
extravagances. She had even achieved the height of denying herself
luxuries--one of the surest and least-trodden short-cuts to a man's
heart--a little secret path he hardly knows himself.

The affair of Zada and Cheever was going the normal course. It had
lost the charm of the wild and wicked--through familiarity; and
it was tending to domestication, as all such moods do if nothing
interrupts them. There are all sorts of endings to such illicit
relations: most of them end with the mutual treachery of two fickle
creatures; some of them end with bitter grief for one or the other
or both; some of them end in crime, or at least disgrace; and some
of them finish, with disconcerting immorality, in an inexcusable
respectability.

The improvement in Zada's mind and heart was, curiously, the most
dangerous thing in the world for Cheever. If she had stayed noisy
and promiscuous and bad, he would have tired of her. But she was
growing soft and homey, gentle as ivy, and as hard to tear away or
to want to tear away. After all, marriage is only the formalizing
of an instinct that existed long before--exists in some animals and
birds who mate without formality and stay mated without compulsion.

When Zada and Cheever had escaped from the Ritz-Carlton they took
lunch at another restaurant. Zada was childishly proud of her tact
and of Cheever's appreciation. But afterward, on the way "home"--as
she called what other people called her "lair"--she grew suddenly
and deeply solemn.

"So your wife is with Dyckman again," she said. "It looks to me
like a sketch."

Cheever flushed. He hated her slang and he did not accept her
conclusion, but this time he did not forbid her to mention his wife.
He could hardly do that when her tact had saved him and Charity from
the results of their double indiscretion and the shame of amusing
that roomful of gossips.

Zada misunderstood his silence for approval; so she spoke her
thoughts aloud:

"If that He and She business goes on I suppose you'll have to
divorce the lady."

"Divorce Charity!" Cheever gasped. "Are you dotty?"

That hit Zada pretty hard, but she bore it. She came back by another
door.

"I guess I am--nearly as dotty as she is about Dyckman. First thing
you know she'll be trying to get free herself. What if she asks you
for a divorce?"

"I'd like to see her!"

"You mean you wouldn't give her her freedom?"

"Not in a thousand years."

He was astounded at the sepulchral woe of Zada's groan. "O Lord,
and I thought--oh--you don't love me at all then! You never really
loved me--really! God help me."

Cheever wondered what Zada would smash first. He hoped it would not
be the window of the car. He hoped he could get her safely indoors
before the smashing began.

He did. She was a grim and murky storm-cloud full of tornado when
they crossed the pavement and the vestibule of the apartment-house
and went up in the elevator.

But once inside the door, her breast began to heave, her nostrils
to quiver, her fingers to work. Her maid came to take her hat, and
paled to see her torment. Zada gave her her things and motioned her
away. She motioned her four or five times. The maid had needed only
one motion.

Cheever watched Zada out of the corner of his eye and wondered why
he had ever been fated to fall in love with such a creature. He was
convinced that he had been fate-forced into the intrigue. He had no
sense whatever of volition or wicked intent. He could only feel that
he had tried to be decent and play fair and be generous.

The thought of what the neighbors were about to hear made him sick
with chagrin. The fact that the neighbors were under suspicion
themselves only aggravated the burden of shame.

The hardest part of Zada's agony was her pitiful effort to take
her medicine like a lady. It was terrific how hard it was for one
of a wildcat heritage and habit to keep the caterwaul back and the
claws muffled. The self-duel nearly wrecked Zada, but she won it.
She was not thoroughbred, but she had tried to be thoroughgoing.
She was evidently not a success as a self-made lady. She kept
whispering to herself:

"What's the use? Oh, why did I try? Oh, oh, oh, what a fool I've
been! To think!--to think!--to think!"

Cheever was distraught. He had waited for the outbreak, and when
it did not come he suffered from the recoil of his own tension.

"For the Lord's sake, yell!" he implored.

She turned on him eyes of extraordinary abjection. She saw at last
where her lawlessness had brought her, and she despised herself. But
she did not love him any the more for understanding him. She saw at
last that one cannot be an honest woman without actually being--an
honest woman. She was going to get honesty if it broke a bone.

She told her accomplice: "I want you to go away and stay away.
Whatever you do, leave me be. There's nothing else you can do for me
except to take back all the stuff you've bought me. Give it to that
wife you love so much and wouldn't suspect no matter what she did.
You love her so much that you wouldn't let her go even if she wanted
to leave you. So go back to her and take these things to her with my
comp'ments."

Now it was Cheever who wanted to scream as he had not screamed
since he was the purple-faced boy who used to kick the floor and
his adoring nurse. But he had lost the safety valve of the scream.
He smothered.

When Zada began to peel off her rings and thrust them out to him he
swiftly turned on his heel and fled. He never knew whether Zada woke
the block with her howls or not when he left her forever.

He forgot to ask when he came back.




CHAPTER XII

First he went home to take his temper to Charity. On the way he
worked up a splendid rage at her for giving such a woman as Zada
grounds for gossip. He went straight to her room and walked in
without knocking.

Charity was dictating a letter to her secretary. Cheever surprised
a phrase before she saw him.

"'Thousands of blind soldiers and thousands of orphans hold out their
hands to us. We must all do what we can--' Why, hello! Where did you
drop from? Give me just a minute while I finish this letter. Let me
see. Where was I?"

The secretary read in a dull, secretarial voice:

"'Thousblinsoldiersorphs--wem'sdo'll we can.'"

"Oh yes," said Charity. "'You have never failed to respond to such
an appeal,' comma; no, semicolon; no, period. 'So I shall put you
down for a subscription of dash 'how much' question-mark. 'Thanking
you in adv'--no, just say, 'My husband joins me in kindest regards
to your dear wife and yourself, cordially yours'--and that will be
all for the present."

The secretary garnered her sheaves and went out. Charity said
to Cheever:

"Well, young man, sit down and tell us what's on your mind. But first
let me tell you my troubles. There's a match on my dresser there.
Peter, I'm in an awful mess with this movie stunt. I can get plenty
of people to pose for the camera, but I can't find a man to manage
the business end of it. I was lunching with Mrs. Noxon at the Ritz
to-day. I called your friend Jim Dyckman over from another table and
begged him to take the job. But he refused flatly, the lazy brute.
Don't you think you could take it on? I wish you would. It's such
a big chance to make a pile of money for those poor soldiers."

Cheever was lost. Unconsciously she had cleared up the scandal of
her talk with Dyckman. He remembered that he had seen Mrs. Noxon
at another table, standing. He felt like a dog and he wanted to
fawn at the heels he had prepared to bite. He felt unworthy to be
the associate of his sainted wife in her good works. He said:

"You flatter me. I couldn't manage a thing like that. I'm busy.
I--I couldn't."

"You've got to play a part, then," she said. "You're looking so well
nowadays, taking such good care of yourself. Will you?"

"I might," he said. "I'll think it over."

She was called to the telephone then and he escaped to his own room.
He moped about and sulked in his uncomfortable virtue. He dressed for
dinner with unusual care. He was trying to make a hit with his wife.

In going through his pocket-book he came across two theater tickets.
He had promised to take Zada. He felt like a low hound, both for
planning to take her and for not taking her. She would have a dismal
evening. And she was capable of such ferocious lonelinesses. He
had driven away all her old friends. She would recall them now, he
supposed. That would be a pity, for they were an odious gang. It
would be his fault if she relapsed. It was his duty, in a way, to
help her to reform.

The ludicrous sublimity of such an ethical snarl reduced him to
inanity. He stayed to dinner. Charity had not expected him to stop.
She had planned an evening's excavation into her correspondence and
had not changed her street dress. She was surprised and childishly
delighted to have him with her--then childishly unhappy as she
observed:

"But you're all togged up. You're going out."

"No--well--that is--er--I was thinking you would like to see a show.
I've got tickets."

"But it's late. I'm not dressed."

"What's the odds? You look all right. There's never anybody but
muckers there Saturday nights. We'll miss it all if you stop
to prink."

"All right," she cried, and hurried through the dinner.

He was glad at least that he had escaped a solemn evening at home.
He could not keep awake at home.

So they went to the theater; but there was not "nobody there," as
he had promised.

Zada was there--alone in a box, dressed in her best, and wearing
her East-Lynniest look of pathos.

The coincidence was not occult. After several hours of brave battle
with grief and a lonely dinner Zada had been faced by the appalling
prospect of an evening alone.

She remembered Cheever's purchase of the theater tickets, and she
was startled with an intuition that he would take his wife in her
place. Men are capable of such indecent economies.

Zada was suffocated with rage at the possibility. She always
believed implicitly in the worst things she could think of. If
Peter Cheever dared do such a thing! And of course he would! Well,
she would just find out!

She threw a lonely wineglass at the fern-dish and smashed a decanter.
Then she pushed off the table about a hundred dollars' worth of
chinaware, and kicked her chair over backward. She had been famous
for her back-kick in her public dancing-days.

She howled to her maid and went into her wardrobe with both hands.
She acted like a windmill in a dress-shop. Finally she came upon
what she was looking for--the most ladylike theater-gown that ever
combined magnificence with dazzling respectability.

She made up her face like a lady's--it took some paint to do that.
Meanwhile, her maid was telephoning speculators for a box. Zada
arrived before Cheever and Charity did. She waited a long time,
haughtily indifferent to the admiration she and her gown were
achieving. At last she was punished and rewarded, revenged, and
destroyed by the sight of Cheever coming down the aisle with Charity.
They had to pause to let a fat couple rise, and they paused, facing
Zada. Cheever caught her eye and halted, petrified, long enough for
Charity to sit down, look up at him, follow the line of his gaze,
and catch a full blast of Zada's beauty and of the fierce look she
fastened on Cheever. Charity's eyes ran back on the almost visible
clothes-line of that taut gaze and found Cheever wilting with
several kinds of shame.

He sat down glum and scarlet, and Charity's heart began to throb.
A second glance told her who Zada was. She had seen the woman often
when Zada had danced in the theaters and the hotel ballrooms.

Charity found herself thinking that she was not Cheever's wife,
but only a poor relation--by marriage. The worst of it was that she
was not dressed for the theater. The gown she wore was exquisite in
its place, but it was dull and informal and it gave her no help in
the ordeal she was suddenly submitted to. Her hair had not been
coiffed by the high-elbowed artist with the waving-tongs. Her brains
were not marceled for a beauty-contest with her rival. She was at
her worst and Zada was at her supreme.

Zada was not entirely unknown to Charity. She had not been able
to escape all the gossip that linked Cheever with her, but she had
naturally heard little of it, and then only from people of the sort
who run to their friends with all the bad news they can collect.
They are easily discredited.

Charity had spent so many bad hours wondering at her husband's
indifference and had heard his name linked with so many names that
she had temporized with the situation. Cheever was of the sort that
looks at every woman with desire, or looks as if he looked so. The
wives of such men grow calloused or quit them.

Charity had not quit Cheever. She had hardly dreamed of it. She had
not outgrown being hurt. Her slow wrath had not begun to manifest
itself. This crushing humiliation smote her from a clear sky.

She was not ready for it. She did not know what to do. She only knew,
by long training, that she must not do what she first wanted to do.
She had been taught from childhood what Zada was only now trying
to learn.

Charity pretended a great interest in her program and laughed
flightily. Cheever was morose. He stole glances at Zada and saw that
she was in anguish. He felt that he had treated her like dirt. He was
unworthy of her, or of his wife, or of anything but a horsewhip.

He glanced at Charity and was fooled by her casual chatter. He
supposed that she was as ignorant of the affair with Zada as he
wanted her to be. He wished that he could pretend to be unconcerned,
but he could not keep his program from shivering; his throat was full
of phlegm; he choked on the simplest words. He thought for some trick
of escape, a pretended illness, a remembered business engagement,
a disgust with the play.

He was afraid to trust his voice to any proposal or even to go out
between the acts.

The worst of it was that he felt sorrier for Zada than for his wife.
Poor Zada had nothing, Charity had everything. How easily we vote
other people everything! Cheever was afraid of the ride home with
Charity; he dreaded to be at home to-night and to-morrow and always.
He longed to go to Zada and help her and let her revile him and
scratch him, perhaps, provided only that she would throw her arms
about him afterward. He never imagined that a duel of self-control,
a mortal combat in refinement, was being fought over him by those
two women.

Zada's strength gave out long before Charity's; she was newer to
the game. During a dark scene she surrendered the field and decamped.
But Cheever and his wife both caught the faint shimmer of her
respectable robe as it floated from the rail and vanished in the
curtains. It was like a dematerialization at a seance.

Cheever wanted to crane his neck and dared not. Charity felt a great
withdrawal of support in the flight of her rival. She had not Zada's
presence now to sustain her through the last act. But she sat it out.

She was bitter against Cheever, and her thoughts dark. The burden
of his infidelity was heavy enough for her to bear, but for him to
subject her to such a confrontation was outrageous. She had no doubt
that it was a cooked-up scheme. That vile creature had planned it
and that worm of a husband had consented to it!

The most unforgivable thing of all, of course, was the clothes
of it.

Charity, in the course of time, forgave nearly everybody everything,
but she never forgave her husband that.

On the way home she had nothing to say. Neither had Cheever. He
felt homesick for Zada. Charity felt homeless. She must have been
the laughing-stock or the pitying-stock of the whole world for
a long time.

When they reached home she bade Cheever a perfectly cheerful
good-night and left him to a cold supper the butler had laid out
for him. She did not know that he stole from the house and flew
to Zada.

Charity was tempted to an immediate denunciation of Cheever and
a declaration of divorce. She would certainly not live with him
another day. That would be to make herself an accomplice, a silent
partner of Zada's. It would be intolerable, immoral, not nice.




CHAPTER XIII

The next morning proved to be a Sunday and she felt a need of
spiritual help in her hour of affliction. Man had betrayed her;
religion would sustain her grim determination to end the unwholesome
condition of her household. The Bible said (didn't it?), "If thy
right hand offend thee, cut it off." That surely meant, "If thy
husband offend thee, divorce him."

She went to church, her ancestral Episcopalian church, where her
revered Doctor Mosely, the kindliest old gentleman in the world,
had poured sermons down at her like ointment and sent prayers up
like smoke since she was a little girl. But on this day he chose
to preach a ferocious harangue against divorce as the chief peril,
the ruination of modern society.

The cowering Charity got from him the impression that home life
had always been flawless in this country until the last few years,
when divorce began to prosper, and that domestic life in countries
where there is little or no divorce had always been an unmitigated
success. If only divorce and remarriage were ended, the millennium
of our fathers would return.

This had not been her previous opinion; it was her vivid impression
from Doctor Mosely, as honest an old darling as ever ran facts
through a sieve and threw away all the big chunks that would not
go through the fine mesh of his prejudices. He abhorred falsehood,
cruelty, skepticism, sectarianism, and narrowness, and his sermons
were unconscious mixtures of hand-picked truth and eloquent legends,
ruthless denunciations of misunderstood people and views, atheism
toward the revelations of all the sciences (particularly the science
of biblical criticism, which he hated worse than he hated Haeckel),
and a narrowness that kept trying to sharpen itself into a razor
edge.

Fortunately he belied in his life almost all of his pulpit crimes
and moved about, a tender, chivalrous, lovable old gentleman. It
was this phase that Charity knew, for she had not heard one of his
sermons for a year or more, though she saw him often in his parish
work. She was the more amenable to his pulpit logic to-day.

Charity had always assumed that the United States was the most
virtuous, enlightened, and humane of nations. According to Doctor
Mosely, it was shockingly corrupt, disgusting. The family as an
institution was almost completely gone; its only salvation would be
an immediate return to a divorceless condition. (Like that of Italy
and Spain and France during the Middle Ages?)

Hitherto Charity had not thought much about divorce, except to regret
that certain friends of hers had not hit it off better and had had to
undergo cruel notoriety after their private distresses. But divorce
was no longer an academic question to her. It had come home.

When she realized that her husband had been not only neglectful
of her, but devoted to a definite other woman, she felt at first
that it would be heinous to receive him back in her arms fresh from
the arms of a vile creature like Zada L'Etoile. Now she got from
the pulpit the distinct message that just this was her one important
duty, and that any attempt to break from such a triple yoke would be
a monstrous iniquity which the Church could not condone.

Doctor Mosely implied that when one partner to a marriage wandered
aside into forbidden paths (as he very prettily phrased the very ugly
matter) it was always the fault of the other partner. He thundered
that the wives of to-day were not like their simple-minded mothers,
because they played bridge and smoked cigarettes and did not attend
prayer-meetings and would not have children. It was small wonder,
he said, that their husbands could not be held. Doctor Mosely had
preached the same sermon at Charity's mother and her generation,
and his father had preached it at his generation, with the necessary
terms changed and the spirit the same. He and his kind had been
trying since time began to cure the inherent ills of human
relationships by railing at old errors and calling them new.

So in the dark ages the good priests had tried to cure insane people
by shouting denunciations at the devils that inhabited them. The
less they cured the louder they shouted, and when the remedy failed
they blamed the patients.

So fathers try to keep their little sons from being naughty and
untruthful by telling them how good and obedient little boys were
when they were little boys. They tell a silly lie to rebuke a lie
and wonder at their non-success.

Marital unrest is no more a sign of wickedness than stomach-ache is;
it is a result of indigestion or ptomaine poisoning, and divorce is
only a strong purge or an emetic, equally distressing and often
the only remedy.

But Doctor Mosely honestly abominated divorce; he regretted it
almost as much as he regretted the Methodist Episcopal heresies
or the perverseness of the low-Church doctrines.

Charity had always been religious; she had wrecked her health
visiting the sick and cherishing the orphan and she had believed
everything she was told to believe. But now when she went to church
for strength and comfort she came away feeling herself a condemned
and branded failure, blameworthy for all her husband's sins and sins
of her own that she had not suspected.

She prayed to be forgiven for causing her husband to sin and asked
strength to win him back to his duty. She reached home in such a
mood of holy devotion that when she found her husband there she
bespoke him tenderly and put out her arms to him and moaned:

"Forgive me!"

"For what?" he said as he went to her from habit before he could
check himself. But even as he clasped her she felt that his very
sleeves were warm from Zada L'Etoile's embrace and she slipped
through his arms to the floor.

When she came to, she was lying on a couch with a cushion under
her heels, and Cheever was chafing her wrists and kissing her hand.
She drew it away feebly and said:

"Thank you. I'll be all right. Just leave me alone."

He remembered that Zada had said much the same thing. He was glad
to leave the room. When he had gone Charity got up and washed her
hands, particularly the hand, particularly the spot, he had kissed.

She seemed to feel that some of the rouge from Zada's lips had been
left there by Cheever's lips. There was a red stain there and she
could not wash it away. Perhaps it was there because she tried so
hard to rub it off. But it tormented her as she went sleep-walking,
rubbing her hand like another Lady Macbeth.




CHAPTER XIV

On Monday there was a meeting of one of the committees she had
organized for the furtherance of what she called the movie stunt.
The committee met at the Colony Club. Most of the committee were
women of large wealth and of executive ability, and they accomplished
a deal of business with expedition in their own way.

There was some chatter, but it was to the point. At length during
a discussion of various forms of entertainment Mrs. Noxon said she
was afraid that the show would be deadly dull with only amateurs in
it. Mrs. Dyckman thought that professionals would make the amateurs
look more amateurish than ever. The debate swayed from side to side,
but finally inclined toward the belief that a few professional bits
would refresh the audience.

And then suddenly Mrs. Neff had to sing out: "Oh, Charity, I've
an idea. Let's get some stunning dancer to do a special number.
I remember one who would be just the ticket. What's the name--Zada
Le Something or other. She's a gorgeous creature. Have you seen her
recently?"

Several women began signaling wildly to Mrs. Neff to keep quiet.
Charity saw their semaphores at work, but Mrs. Neff was blind--blind,
but not speechless. She kept on singing the praises of Zada till
everybody wanted to gag her.

An open mind to gossip is an important thing. We ought to keep up
with all the scandals concerning our friends and enemies. Otherwise
we lose many an opportunity to undercut the latter and we are
constantly annoying the former.

It was Mrs. Neff, of all people--and she loved Charity Coe
dearly--who caused her public shame and suffering. Mrs. Neff
had defended Charity from the slanderous assumptions of Prissy
Atterbury and had refused to listen to Pet Bettany's echoes.

She had, indeed, a bad reputation for rebuking well-meaning
disseminators of spice. This attitude discouraged several persons
who would otherwise have told her all sorts of interesting things
about Charity's husband's _entente cordiale_ with Zada.

Charity had dwelt in a fool's paradise of trust in Peter Cheever
for a while, then had dropped back into a fool's purgatory of doubt,
where she wandered bewildered. Now she was thrown into the fool's
hell. She knew that her love had been betrayed. Everybody else knew
it and was wondering how she would act.

Charity was sick. This was really more than she had bargained for.
As before, she felt it immodest to expose her emotions in public,
so she said:

"Yes, I've seen her. She is very attractive, isn't she? I don't know
if she is dancing in public any more, but I'll find out."

Mrs. Neff sat back triumphantly and let the meeting proceed. But
there was a gray pall on the occasion. Women began to look at their
wrist-watches and pretend to be shocked at the lateness of the hour,
and all of them shook hands solemnly with Charity. There was a poorly
veiled condolence in their tone.

Charity carried it off pluckily, but she was in a dangerous humor.
She really could not endure the patronizing mercy of these women.

That night Cheever made again his appearance at the dinner-table.
He had some notion of putting Charity off her guard or of atoning
to her in part for his resumed alliance with Zada. He could not have
told what his own motives were, for he was in a state of bewilderment
between his duties to Mrs. Charity Tweedledum and Miss Zada
Tweedledee. He could not tell which one had the greater claim
on his favors.

Charity studied him across the table and wondered what he really was,
faun or traitor, Mormon or weakling. He was certainly handsome, but
the influence of Zada L'Etoile seemed to hang about him like a green
slime on a statue.

She could not find any small talk to carry the meal along. At length
Cheever asked:

"What you been up to all day?"

"Oh, committee stuff--that movie thing, you know."

"How's it coming on? Got a manager yet?"

"Not yet. We were talking about getting some professionals in
to brighten up the evening."

"Good work! Those amateurs make me sick."

"Mrs. Neff proposed that we get some stunning dancer to do a turn."

"Not a bad idea. For instance--"

He emptied his glass of Chablis and the butler was standing by
to refill it when Charity answered:

"Mrs. Neff suggested a dancer I haven't seen on the stage for some
time. You used to admire her."

"Yes?" said Cheever, pushing his glass along the table toward
the butler, who began to pour as Charity slid home her _coup
de grace_.

"Zada L'Etoile. What's become of her?"

Cheever's eyes gaped and his jaws dropped. The butler's expression
was the same. He poured the Chablis on the back of Cheever's hand
and neither noticed it till Charity laughed hysterically and drove
the sword a little deeper:

"Is she still alive? Have you seen her?"

Cheever glared at her, breathed hard, swore at the butler, wiped
his hand on his napkin, gnawed his lips, twisted his mustache,
threw down the napkin, rose, and left the table.

Charity's smile turned to a grimace. She saw that the butler was
ashamed of her. He almost told her that she ought to have known
better than subject him and the other servants to such a scene.

Charity caught herself about to say, "I beg your pardon, Hammond."

She felt as if she ought to beg the pardon of everybody in the world.

She could not stand the lonely dining-room long. She rose and walked
out. It seemed that she would never reach the door. It was a _via
crucis_ to her. Her back ached with the sense of eyes upon it.

The hall was lonely. The thud of the front door jarred her. She went
into the library. It was a dark and frowning cavern. She went into
the music-room, approached the piano, looked over the music, turned
up "Go, Lovely Rose." The rose that Jim Dyckman said she was had been
thrown into the mud. She went up to her room. The maid was arranging
her bed for the night. She had turned down one corner of the cover,
built up one heap of pillows, set one pair of slippers by the edge.

Charity felt like a rejected old spinster. She sat and mused and
her thoughts were bitter. She remembered Doctor Mosely's sermon
and wondered if he would preach what he preached if he knew what
she knew. She would go to him and tell him.

But what did she know? Enough to convince herself, but nothing at
all that even a preacher would call evidence.

She must have proof. She resolved to get it. There must be an
abundance of it. She wondered how one went at the getting of
evidence.




CHAPTER XV

While Charity was resolving to tear down her life Kedzie Thropp was
building herself a new one on the foundations that Charity had laid
for her with a card of introduction to Miss Havender.

In the motion-picture world Kedzie had found herself. Her very
limitations were to her advantage. She would have failed dismally
in the spoken drama, but the flowing photograma was just to her
measure.

The actor must not only know how to read his lines and express
emotions, but must keep up the same spontaneity night after night,
sometimes for a thousand performances or more. The movie actor
is expected to respond to a situation once or twice for rehearsal,
and once or twice for the camera. There is no audience to struggle
against and listen for--and to. The director is always there at
the side calling, reminding, pleading, encouraging, threatening,
suggesting the thoughts, the lines, and the expression, doing all
the work except the pantomime.

That was Kedzie's salvation. Tell her a story and make her the
heroine of it, and her excitable heart would thrill to the emotional
crisis. Take a snapshot of her, and the picture was caught.

Ferriday soon learned this and protected her from her own helpless
vice of discontent. She lapsed always from her enthusiasm after
it was once cold. As an actress she would have been one of those
frequent flashers who give a splendid rehearsal or two and then sink
back into a torpor. She might have risen to an appealing first-night
performance. Thereafter, she would have become dismal. The second
week would have found the audiences disgusted and the third would
have found her breaking her contract and running away with somebody.
A horse that has run away once is likely to run away again. Kedzie
had run away twice.

But the movie life was just the thing for her. She did not play
always the same set scenes in the same scene sets. She was not
required even to follow the logic of the story. For a while she
would play a bit in a tiny angle representing a drawing-room. When
that was taken she would play, not the next moment of the story,
but the next scene in that scene. It might be a year further along
in the story. It was exciting.

Her second picture had great success. She played the girl brought up
as a boy by a cruel Italian padrone who made her steal. Her third
picture was as nearly the same as possible.

Now she was a ragged waif, a girl, who dressed as a boy and sold
newspapers so as to keep her old father in liquor. The garret was
a rickety table, a rusty stove, a broken chair, and a V of painted
canvas walls with a broken window and a paper snowstorm falling
back of it. There Kedzie was found in very becoming ragged breeches,
pouting with starvation. Her father drove her out for gin.

She walked out of the set, picked up a bottle, and brought it back.
The scene in the saloon would be taken later: also the street scenes
to and from.

An officer of the "Cruelty" came and took her from the garret. That
was the beginning of a series of adventures culminating in a marriage
with a multimillionaire. While the garret was set, the finish of
the story was taken.

She ran and changed her costume to one of wealth with ermine. She
came in with the handsome young millionaire. It was the next winter.
Her father was dying. He asked her forgiveness and gave her his
blessing. Then Kedzie changed back to her first costume and went
in the motor to a dismal street where she was shown coming out of
the tenement, and going back to it gin-laden, and again with the
officer of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.

She changed once more to her wealthy garb with the ermine and was
photographed going in with her young millionaire.

The next day the scene in the Cruelty office was built and she acted
in it. The drawing-room in the millionaire's home was assembled and
she acted in that. Then she went out in rags and sold newspapers
on a corner. So it went. The chronology hopelessly jumbled, but
the change incessant.

The studio was a palace of industry. Many of the scenes were played
on the great glass-covered roof. On bright days she would ride in
a closed automobile to some street or some lonely glen or to the
home of some wealthy person who had lent his house to the movies
on the bribe of a gift to his favorite benevolence.

There was the thrill of sitting in the projection-room and watching
herself scamper across the scene, or flirt or weep, look pretty or
gorgeous, sad or gay.

One's own portrait is always a terribly fascinating thing, for it
is always the inaccurate portrait of a stranger curiously akin to
one and curiously alien. But to see one's portrait move and breathe
and feel is magic unbelievable.

In the enlarged close-ups when Kedzie was a girl giantess, the effect
was uncanny. She loved herself and was glad of the friendly dark that
hid her own wild pride in her beauty, but did not prevent her from
hearing the exclamations of Ferriday and the backers and the other
actors who were admitted to the preliminary views.

There was a quality in her work that surpassed Ferriday's
expectations and made her pantomime singularly legible. The
modulations of her thought from one extreme mood to another were
always traceable. This was true of the least feelings. Ferriday
would say: "Now you decide to telephone your lover. You hesitate,
you telephone, a girl answers, you wait, he speaks, you smile."

Kedzie would nod with impatient zest and one could read each
gradation of thought. "I'd better telephone him. I will. No, I'd
better not. Yes. No. Shall I? Well, I will. Hello! Hello, Central!
Hurry up! Gramercy 816. What takes so long? Is this Gramercy 816?
Mr. Monteith. Oh, isn't she smart? What keeps him? Is he out? No,
there he is! Oh, joy! I must be very severe. Hello, Harry."

All these thoughts the spectator could follow. They ran, as it
were, under her skin. There was no stolidity or phlegm. She was
astoundingly alive and real. Unimportant, without sublimity of
emotion or intellectual power, she was irresistibly real. The
public understood all she told it, and adored her.

Her petulance, quick temper, pretty discontent, did not harm her
on the screen, but helped immensely, for they gave her character.
It was delicious to see her eyes narrow with sudden resentment or
girlish malice and widen again with equally abrupt affection. She
was so pretty that she could afford to act ugly.

It took time, however, to get Kedzie from the studio to the negative,
then to the positive. There was editing to do, and it seemed to her
that her most delicious bits had to be cut out, because Ferriday
always took three or four thousand feet of film for every thousand
he used. They had to cut out more Kedzie to let in the titles and
subtitles, and it angered her to see how much space was given to
other members of the cast. She simply loathed the scenes she was not
the center of, and she developed an acerbity of protest against any
"trespass" on her "rights" that proved her a genuine business woman.

She learned the tricks of the trade with magnificent speed. She was
never so meek and helpless of expression as when she slipped in front
of another actor or actress and filled as much of the foreground as
her slenderness permitted. When she was crowded into the background
she knew how to divert attention to herself during the best moments
of the other people in the scene. And she could most innocently spoil
any bit that she did not like to do herself or have done by another.

In the studio she was speedily recognized as an ambitious young woman
zealous for self-advancement. In fact, they called her a "reel hog"
and a "glutton for footage." A number of minor feuds were turned into
deep friendships through a common resentment at Kedzie's impartial
robberies.

Ferriday did not object to these professional traits. They exist
in all trades, and success is never won in large measure without
them. Almost all businesses are little trusts, monopolies more or
less tiny, more or less ruthless.

Ferriday delighted in Kedzie's battle for space with the other
members of the troupe. They kept everybody intense. The lover loved
her better on the screen for hating her personal avarice. Her mother
in the picture was more meltingly tender in her caresses for wanting
to scratch the little cat's eyes out. The clergyman who pointed her
the way to heaven grew more ardently devout for having to grip
the floor with his feet to keep the adoring Kedzie from edging him
off his own pulpit.

This rivalry is better than any number of chaperons, and Kedzie
was saved from any danger of falling in love with the unspeakably
beautiful leading man by the ferocity of her jealousy of him. She
had once, as a little girl in Nimrim, Missouri, nearly swooned at
the glory of this Lorraine Melnotte, and she had written him a little
letter of adoration, one of some nineteen he received that day from
lovelorn girls about the globe.

When she met him first in the studio he was painted as delicately as
a barber-pole, and he stood sweating in a scene under the full blast
of a battery of sick green Cooper-Hewitt lights. He looked about
three days dead and loathsome as an iguana. He was in full evening
dress, and Kedzie had always marveled at the snowiness of his linen.

Now she saw how he got the effect. He wore a yellow shirt, collar,
tie, and waistcoat in order that the photographic result should be
the purest white. The yellow linen was the completing horror under
the spoiled mustard color of his face with its mouth the color of
an overripe plum.

His expression did not redeem his appalling features that day, nor
did his language help. While the cameraman leaned on his idle machine
and looked weary Lorraine Melnotte was having a sweet little row with
the actress playing his sainted mother. He was threatening to have
her fired if she didn't keep her place.

That finished him for Kedzie. She could not tolerate professional
jealousy. She never could. Her own was merely a defense of her
dignity and her rights against the peculiarly impossible people who
infested the studio. That was Kedzie's own phrase, for she had not
lived with a poet long before she began to experiment with large
words. She practised before a mirror any phrases she particularly
liked. She had probably heard Ferriday use the expression and she
got herself up on it till she was glib. Anybody who can be glib
with "peculiarly impossible" is in a fair way to be articulate.
All Kedzie needed was a little more certainty on her grammar; and
her ear was giving her that.

Her contempt for Lorraine Melnotte culminated in a dark suspicion
that that was not his real born name. If Anita Adair was Kedzie
Thropp what would Lorraine Melnotte have been? It was a pretty
problem in algebra. But Kedzie despised a man that would take
another name. And such a name--as unworthy of a man as a box of
chocolate fudge.

So the image of Mr. Melnotte fell out of the niche in her heart and
went over into the gallery of her hates. She fought him with every
weapon and every foul thrust known to shy little women in dealing
with big, blustering men. She loved to call him "Melnit" or
"naughty Mel."

He was lost from the start and was soon begging to be released from
his contract. The backers were too sure of his vogue, however, to
let him go, and it was none of their affair how fiercely Adair and
Melnotte indulged in mutual loathing, so long as their screen-love
was so wholesomely sweet.

With Ferriday Kedzie's relations were more perilous. He had invented
her and was patenting her. She dreaded his wisdom and accepted his
least theory as gospel--at first. He combined a remote and godlike
intellect with a bending and fatherly grace. And now and then, like
the other gods of all the mythologies, he came down to earth in
an amorous mood.

Now Kedzie's surety was her canny realization of the value of
tantalism. She was not long left in ignorance of his record for
flitting fancy and she felt that he would flit from her as soon
as he conquered her. Her duty was plain.

She played him well and drove him frantic. It would have been hard
to say whether he hated her or loved her more when he found her
always just a little beyond. He had begun with the greatest gift in
his power. He had promised her world-wide fame, and no other gift
could count till he had made that good. And it would take a long,
long while of incessant labor to build.

Ferriday belittled himself in Kedzie's eyes by his groans of baffled
egotism. She could read his plots on his countenance, and thwart him
in advance. But this was not always easy for her, and again and again
he had only himself to blame for his non-success with Kedzie's heart.
With Kedzie's fame he was having a very sudden and phenomenal triumph
--if anything could be called phenomenal in a field which itself was
phenomenal always.




CHAPTER XVI

Ferriday did not know, of course, that Kedzie was married. She hardly
knew it herself now. Gilfoyle had been three weeks late in sending
her the thirty dollars' fare to Chicago. Then she wrote him that she
was doing fairly well at the studio and she would stick to her work.
She sent him oceans of love, but she did not send him the thirty
dollars.

Besides, he had borrowed it of her in the first place, and she had
had to borrow more of Ferriday. She had neglected to pay him back.
She needed so much for her new clothes and new expenses innumerable
inflicted on her by her improved estate.

And, of course, she left the miserable little flat on the landlord's
hands. He wasted a good deal of time trying to get the rent paid.
Besides, it was rented in Gilfoyle's name and he was safe in Chicago.
And yet not very safe, for Chicago has also its Bohemia, its clusters
of real and imitation artists, its talkers and dabblers, as well as
its toilers and achievers.

Gilfoyle found some wonderful Western sirens who listened to
his poetry. They were new to him and he to them. His Eastern
pronunciations fascinated them as they had fascinated Kedzie,
and he soon found in them all the breeziness and wholesomeness
of the great prairies which are found in the mid-Western women
of literature.

Gilfoyle had apparently forgotten that his own wife was a
mid-Westerness, and the least breezy, wholesome, prairian thing
imaginable. He saw mid-Western women of all sorts about him, but
he was of those who must have a type for every section of humanity
and who will not be shaken in their belief by any majority of
exceptions.

When Gilfoyle got Kedzie's letter saying that she would not join him
yet awhile he wrote her a letter of poetic grief at the separation.
But poets, like the rest of us, are the better for getting a grief
on paper and out of the system.

Kedzie did not answer his letter for a long while and he did not
miss her answer much, for he was having his own little triumphs.
The advertisements he wrote were receiving honorable mention at the
office and he was having success with his poetry and his flirtations
of evenings.

He returned to his boarding-house one night and looked at his face
in the mirror, stared into the eyes that stared back. A certain
melting and molten and molting lady had told him that he had poet's
eyes like Julian Street's and was almost as witty. Gilfoyle tried
with his shaving-glass and the bureau mirror to study the profile
that someone else had compared to the cameonic visage of Richard
Le Gallienne.

Gilfoyle was gloriously ashamed of himself. In the voice that
someone else had compared to Charlie Towne's reading his own verses
he addressed his reflection with scorn:

"You heartless dog! You ought to be shot--forgetting that you have
a poor little deserted wife toiling in the great city. You're as
bad as Lord Byron ever was."

Then he wrote a sonnet against his own perfidy and accepted
confession as atonement and plenary indulgence.

He was one of those who, when they have cried, "I have sinned," hear
a mysterious voice saying, "Poor sufferer, go and sin some more."

So he did, and he went the way of millions of lazy-minded, lazy-
moraled husbands while Kedzie went the way of men and women who
succeed by self-exploitation and count only that bad morals which
is also bad business. And that was the status of the matrimonial
adventure of the Gilfoyles for the present. It made no perceptible
difference to anybody that they were married--least of all to
themselves--for the present. But of course Kedzie was obscurely
preparing all this while for a tremendous explosion into publicity
and into what is known as "the big money." And that was bound to
make a vast difference to Gilfoyle as well as to Mrs. Gilfoyle.

In these all-revolutionary days a man had better be a little polite
always to his wife, for in some totally unexpectable way she may
suddenly prove to be a bigger man than he is, a money-getter, a
fame or shame acquirer--if only by way of becoming the president of
a suffrage association or a best-seller or an inventor of a popular
doll.

And again, all this time--a very short time, considering the changes
it made in everybody concerned--Ferriday was Kedzie's alternate hope
and despair, good angel and bad, uplifter and down-yanker.

Sometimes he threatened to stop the picture and destroy it unless she
kissed him. And she knew that he could and would do almost anything
of that sort. Had not his backers threatened to murder him or sue him
if he did not finish the big feature? At such times Kedzie usually
kissed Ferriday to keep him quiet. But she was as careful not to give
too many kisses as she had been not to put too many caramels in half
a pound when she had clerked in the little candy-store. Nowadays she
would pause and watch the quivering scale of policy intently with one
more sweet poised as if it were worth its weight in gold. The ability
to stop while the scale wavers in the tiny zone of just-a-little-too-
little and just-a-little-too-much is what makes success in any
business of man--or woman-kind.

It was not always easy for Kedzie to withhold that extra bonbon.
There were times when Ferriday raised her hopes and her pride so
high that she fairly squealed with love of him and hugged him. That
would have been the destruction of Kedzie if there had not been the
counter-weight of conceit in Ferriday's soul, for at those times he
would sigh to himself or aloud:

"You are loving me only because I am useful to you."

This thought always sobered and chilled Mr. Ferriday. He worked
none the less for her and himself and he tried in a hundred ways
to surprise the little witch into an adoration complete enough to
make her forget herself, make her capable of that ultimate altruism
to which a woman falls or rises when she stretches herself out on
the altar of love.

Ferriday began to think seriously that the only way he could break
Kedzie's pride completely would be to make her his wife. He began
to wonder if that were not, after all, what she was driving at--or
trying to drive him to.

Life will be so much more wholesome when women propose marriage
as men do and have a plain, frank talk about it instead of their
eternal business of veils and reticences, fugitive impulses real
or coquettish, modesties real or faked.

Ferriday could not be sure of Kedzie, and he grew so curious to know
that finally he broke out, "In the Lord's name, will you or will you
not marry me, damn you?"

And Kedzie answered: "Of course not. I wouldn't dream of such
a thing."

But that did not prove anything, either. Perhaps she merely wanted
to trawl him along.

She had Ferriday almost crazy--at least she had added one more to
his manias--when Jim Dyckman wandered into the studio and set up
an entirely new series of ambitions and discontents.




CHAPTER XVII

Charity Coe forgot her great moving-picture enterprise for a time
in the agony of her discovery that her husband was disloyal and
that the Church did not accept that as a cancellation of her own
loyalty.

For a long time she was in such misery of uncertainty that she went
up to the mountains to recover her strength. She came back at last,
made simple and stoical somehow by the contrast of human pettiness
with the serenity (as we call it) of those vast masses of debris
that we poetize and humanize as patient giants.

Her absence had left Cheever entirely to his own devices and to
Zada's. They had made up and fought and made up again dozens of
times and settled down at length to that normal alternation of
peace and conflict known as domestic life.

With Charity out of the way there was so little interruption to
their communion that when she came back Zada forbade Cheever to
meet her at the station, and he obeyed.

Charity felt that she had brought with her the weight of the
mountains instead of their calm when she detrained in the thronged
solitude of the Grand Central Terminal. And the house with its
sympathetic family of servants only was as home-like as the Mammoth
Cave.

She took up her work with a frenzy. The need of a man to act as her
adjutant in the business details was imperative. She thought of Jim
Dyckman again, and with a different thought.

When he pleaded to her before she had imagined that she was at least
officially a wife. Now she felt divorced and abandoned, a waif on
the public mercy.

She wanted to talk to Jim because she felt so disprized and
downtrodden that she wanted to see somebody who adored her. She
felt wild impulses to throw herself into his keeping. She wanted to
be bad just to spite the bad. But she merely convinced herself that
she was wicked enough already and deserving of her punishment.

She made the moving-picture scheme a good excuse for asking Jim
to grant her a talk--a business talk. To protect herself from him
and from herself she made a convenience of Mrs. Neff's home. Jim
met her there. She was not looking her best and her mood was one of
artificial indirectness that offended him. He never dreamed that it
was because she was afraid to show him how glad she was to see him.

He was furious at her--so he said he would do her bidding. She
dumped the financial and mechanical ends of the enterprise on his
hands and he accepted the burden. He had nothing else pressing for
his time.

One of his first duties, Charity told him, was to call at the
Hyperfilm Studio and try to engage that Mr. Ferriday for director
and learn the ropes.

"While you're there you might inquire about that little girl you
pulled out of the pool. I sent her there. They promised her a job.
Her name was--I have it at home in my address-book. I'll telephone
it to you."

And she did. She had no more acquaintance with the history
Kedzie was making in the moving-picture world than she had of
the sensational rise of the latest politician in Tibet. Neither
had Jim.

He had been traveling about on his mother's yacht and in less
correct societies, trying to convince himself that he was cured
of Charity. He did not know that the first pictures of Anita Adair
were causing lines to gather outside the moving-picture theaters
of numberless cities and towns.

When his car halted before the big studio where Ferriday was high
priest Jim might have been a traveler entering a temple in Lassa,
for all he knew of its rites and its powers.

No more did the doorman know the power and place of Jim Dyckman.
When Jim said he had an appointment with Mr. Ferriday the doorman
thumbed him up the marble stairs. There were many doors, but no
signs on them, and Dyckman blundered about. At length he turned
down a corridor and found himself in the workshop.

A vast room it was, the floor hidden with low canvas walls and doors
marked "Keep out." Overhead were girders of steel from which depended
heavy chains supporting hundreds of slanting tubes glowing with green
fire.

From somewhere in the inclosures came a voice in distress. It was
the first time Dyckman ever heard Ferriday's voice, and it puzzled
him as it cried:

"Come on, choke her--choke harder, you fool; you're not a masseur--
you're a murderer. Now drag her across to the edge of the well.
Pause, look back. Come on, Melnotte: yell at him! 'Stop, stop, you
dog!' Turn round, Higgins; draw your knife. Go to it now! Give 'em
a real fight. That's all right. Only a little cut. The blood looks
good. Get up, Miss Adair; crawl away on hands and knees. Don't
forget you've been choked. Now take the knife away, Melnotte. Rise;
look triumphant; see the girl. Get to him, Miss Adair. Easy on the
embrace: you're a shy little thing. 'My hero! you have saved me!'
Now, Melnotte: 'Clarice! it is you! you!' Cut! How many feet, Jones?

"Now we'll take the scene in the vat of sulphuric acid. Is the tank
ready? You go lie down and rest, Miss Adair. We won't want you for
half an hour."

As Kedzie left the scene she found Dyckman waiting for her. He
lifted his hat and spoke down at her:

"Pardon me, but you're Miss Adair, aren't you?"

"Yes," said Kedzie, with as much modesty as a queen could show,
incidentally noting that the man who bespoke her so timidly was
plainly a real swell. She was getting so now that she could tell
the real from the plated.

"I heard them murdering you in there and I--Well, Mrs. Cheever asked
me to look you up and see how you were getting along. I see you are."

"Mrs. Cheever!" said Kedzie, searching her memory. Then, with great
kindliness, "Oh yes! I remember her."

"You've forgotten me, I suppose. I had the pleasure--the sad pleasure
of helping you out of the water at Mrs. Noxon's."

"Oh, Lord, yes," Kedzie cried, forgetting her rank. "You're Jim
Dyckman--I mean, Mr. Dyckman."

"So you remember my name," he flushed. "Well, I must say!"

"I didn't remember to thank you," said Kedzie. "I was all damp and
mad. I've often thought of writing to you." And she had.

"I wish you had," said Dyckman. "Well, well!"

He didn't know what to say, and so he laughed and she laughed and
they were well acquainted. Then he thought of a good one.

"I pulled you out of the cold water, so it's your turn to pull me
out of the hot."

"What hot?" said Kedzie.

"I've been sent up here to learn the trade."

Kedzie had a horrible feeling that he must have lost his money.
Wouldn't it be just her luck to meet her first millionaire after he
had become an ex-?

But Dyckman said that he had come to try and engage Mr. Ferriday,
and that sounded so splendid to Kedzie that she snuggled closer.
Ordinarily when a woman cowers under the eaves of a man's shoulder
it is taken for a signal for amiabilities to begin.

Dyckman could not imagine that Kedzie was already as bad as all
that. She wasn't. She was just trying to get as close as she could
to a million dollars. Her feelings were as innocent and as imbecile
as those of the mobs that stand in line for the privilege of
pump-handling a politician.

Jim Dyckman kept forgetting that he was so rich. He hated to be
reminded of it. He did not suspect Kedzie of such a thought. He
stared down at her and thought she was cruelly pretty. He wanted
to tell her so, but he found himself saying:

"But I mustn't keep you. I heard somebody say that you were to
lie down and rest up."

"Oh, that was only Mr. Ferriday. I'm not tired a bit."

"Ferriday. Oh yes, I'm forgetting him. He's the feller I've
come to see."

"He can't be approached when he's working. Sit down, won't you?"

He sat down on an old bench and she sat down, too. She had never
felt quite so contented as this. And Dyckman had not felt so teased
by beauty in a longer time than he could remember.

Kedzie was as exotic to him as a Japanese doll. Her face was painted
in picturesque blotches that reminded him of a toy-shop. Her eyes
were made up with a delicate green that gave them an effect unknown
to him.

She was dressed as a young farm girl with a sunbonnet a-dangle at
the back of her neck, her curls trailing across her rounded shoulders
and down upon her dreamy bosom. She sat and swung her little feet
and looked up at him sidewise.

He forgot all about Ferriday, and when Ferriday came along did not
see him. Kedzie did not tell him. She pretended not to see Ferriday,
though she enjoyed enormously the shock it gave him to find her
so much at ease with that big stranger.

Ferriday was so indignant at being snubbed in his own domain by
his own creation that he sent Garfinkel to see who the fellow was
and throw him out. Garfinkel came back with Dyckman, followed
by Kedzie.

Before Garfinkel could present Dyckman to the great Ferriday, Kedzie
made the introduction. Dyckman was already her own property. She had
seen him first.

Ferriday was jolted by the impact of the great name of Dyckman. He
was restored by the suppliant attitude of his visitor. He said that
he doubted if he could find the time to direct an amateur picture.
Dyckman hastened to say:

"Of course, money is no object to us...."

"Nor to me," Ferriday said, coldly.

Dyckman went on as if he had not heard: "... Except that the more
the show costs the less there is for the charity."

"I should be glad to donate my services to the cause," said
Ferriday, who could be magnificent.

"Three cheers for you!" said Dyckman, who could not.

Ferriday had neither the time nor the patience for the task. But
when the chance came to dazzle the rich by the rich generosity of
working for nothing, he could not afford to let it pass. To tip
a millionaire! He had to do that.

He saw incidentally that Kedzie was fairly hypnotized by Dyckman and
Dyckman by her. His first flare of jealousy died out. To be cut out
by a prince has always been a kind of ennoblement in itself.

Also one of Ferriday's inspirations came to him. If he could get
those two infatuated with each other it would not only take Kedzie
off his heart, but it might be made to redound to the further
advantage of his own genius. A scheme occurred to him. He was
building the scenario of it in the back room of his head while
his guest occupied his parlor.

He wanted to be alone and he wanted Dyckman and Kedzie to be alone
together. And so did Kedzie. Ferriday suggested:

"Perhaps Mr. Dyckman would like to look over the studio--and perhaps
Miss Adair would show him about."

Kedzie started to cry, "You bet your boots," but she caught herself
in time and shifted to, "I should be chawmed." Millionaires did not
use plain words.

Then Dyckman said, "Great!"

He followed Kedzie wherever she led. He was as awkward and out of
place as a school-boy at his first big dance. Kedzie showed him
a murder scene being enacted under the bluesome light. She took
great pains not to let any of it stain her skin. She showed him
a comic scene with a skeletonic man on a comic bicycle. Dyckman
roared when the other comedian lubricated the cyclist's joints
with an oil-can.

Kedzie showed him the projection-room and told the operator to run
off a bit of a scene in which she was revealed to no disadvantage.
She sat alone in the dark with a million dollars that were crazy
about her. She could tell that Dyckman was tremendously excited.

Here at last was her long-sought opportunity to rebuff the advances
of a wicked plutocrat. But he didn't make any, and she might not have
rebuffed them. Still, the air was a-quiver with that electricity
generated almost audibly by a man and a woman alone in the dark.

Dyckman was ashamed of himself and of his arm for wanting to gather
in that delectable partridge, but he behaved himself admirably.

He told her that she was a "corker," a "dream," and "one sweet song,"
and that the picture did not do her justice.

Kedzie showed him the other departments of the picture-factory and
he was amazed at all she knew. So was she. He stayed a long while
and saw everything and yet he said he would come again.

He suggested that it might be nice if Mr. Ferriday and Miss Adair
would dine with him soon. Ferriday was free "to-morrow," and so they
made it to-morrow evening at the Vanderbilt.

Kedzie was there and Dyckman was there, but a boy brought a note
from Mr. Ferriday saying that he was unavoidably prevented from
being present.

Dyckman grinned: "We'll have to bear up under it the best we can.
You won't run away just because your chaperon is gone, will you?"

Kedzie smiled and said she would stay. But she was puzzled. What
was Ferriday up to? One always suspected that Ferriday was up to
something and thinking of something other than what he did or said.

Kedzie was not ashamed of her clothes this time. Indeed, when she
gave her opera-cloak to the maid she came out so resplendent that
Jim Dyckman said:

"Zowie! but you're a--Whew! aren't you great? Some change-o from
the little farm girl I saw up at the studio. I don't suppose you'll
eat anything but a little bird-seed."

She was elated to see the _maitre d'hotel_ shake hands with
her escort and ask him how he was and where he had been. Jim
apologized for neglecting to call recently, and the two sauntered
like friends across to a table where half a dozen waiters bowed
and smiled and welcomed the prodigal home.

When they were seated the headwaiter said, "The moosels vit sauce
mariniere are nize to-nide."

Dyckman shook his head: "Ump-umm! I'm on the water-wagon and the
diet kitchen. Miss Adair can go as far as she likes, but I've got
to stick to a little thick soup, a big, thick steak, and after, a
little French pastry, some coffee, and a bottle of polly water--and
I'll risk a mug of old musty." He turned to Kedzie: "And now I've
ordered, what do you want? I never could order for anybody else."

Kedzie was disappointed in him. He was nothing like Ferriday. He
didn't use a French word once. She was afraid to venture on her own.

"I'll take the same things," she said.

"Sensible lady," said Jim. "Women who work must eat."

Kedzie hated to be referred to as a worker by an idler. She little
knew how much Jim Dyckman wished he were a worker.

She could not make him out. Her little hook had dragged out Leviathan
and she was surprised to find how unlike he was to her plans for
her first millionaire. He ate like a hungry man who ordered what he
wanted and made no effort to want what he did not want. He had had so
much elaborated food that he craved few courses and simple. He said
what came into his head, without frills or pose. He was sincerely
delighted with Kedzie and made neither secret nor poetry of it.

Toward the last of the dinner Kedzie ceased to try to find in him
what was not there. She accepted him as the least affected person
she had ever met. He could afford to be unaffected and careless
and spontaneous. He had nothing to gain. He had everything already.
Kedzie would have said that he ought to have been happy because of
that, as if that were not as good an excuse for discontent as any.
In any case, Kedzie said to herself:

"He's the real thing."

She wanted to be that very thing--that most difficult thing--real.
It became her new ambition.

After the dinner Dyckman offered to take her home. He had a limousine
waiting for him. She did not ask him to put her into a taxicab. She
was not afraid to have him ride home with her. She was afraid he
wouldn't. She was not ashamed of the apartment-house she was living
in now. It was nothing wonderful, but all the money had been spent
on the hall. And that was as far as Dyckman would get--yet.

Kedzie had acquired a serenity toward all the world except what
she called "high society." In her mind the word _high_ had
the significance it has with reference to game that has been kept
to the last critical moments, and trembles, exquisitely putrid,
between being eaten immediately and being thrown away soon.

There is enough and to spare of that high element among the wealthy,
but so there is among the poor and among all the middlings. Kedzie
had met with it on her way up, and she expected to find it in
Dyckman. She looked forward to a thrilling adventure.

She could not have imagined that Dyckman was far more afraid of her
than she of him. She was so tiny and he so big that she terrorized
him as a mouse an elephant, or a baby a saddle-horse. The elephant
is probably afraid that he will squash the little gliding insect,
the horse that he might step on the child.

The disparity between Jim Dyckman and Kedzie was not so great, and
they were both of the same species. But he felt a kind of terror of
her. And yet she fascinated him as an interesting toy that laughed
and talked and probably would not say "Mamma!" if squeezed.

Dyckman had been lonely and blue, rejected and dejected. Kedzie was
something different. He had known lots of actresses, large and small,
stately, learned, cheap, stupid, brilliant, bad, good, gorgeous,
shabby, wanton, icy. But Kedzie was his first movie actress. She
dwelt in a strange realm of unknown colors and machineries.

She was a new toy in a new toyhouse--a whole Noah's ark of queer
toys. He wanted to play with those toys. She made him a
_revenant_ to childhood. Or, as he put it:

"Gee! but you make me feel as silly as a kid."

That surprised Kedzie. It was not the sort of talk she expected
from a world which was stranger to her than the movie studio to
him. He was perfectly natural, and that threw her into a spasm of
artificiality.

He sat staring down at her. He put his hands under his knees and sat
on them to keep them from touching her, as they wanted to. For all
he knew, she was covered with fresh paint. That made her practically
irresistible. Would it come off if he kissed her? He had to find out.

Finally he said, so helplessly, passively, that it would be more
accurate to say it was said by him:

"Say, Miss Adair, I'm a dead-goner if you don't gimme a kiss."

Kedzie was horrified. Skip Magruder would have been eleganter than
that. She answered, with dignity:

"Certainly, if you so desire."

That ought to have chaperoned him back to his senses, but he was too
far gone. His long arms shot out, went round her, gathered her up
to his breast. His high head came down like a swan's, and his lips
pressed hers.

Whatever her soul was, her flesh was all girlhood in one flower of
lithe stem, leaf, petal, sepal, and perfume. There was nothing of
the opiate poppy, the ominous orchid, or even that velvet voluptuary,
the rose. She was like a great pink, sweet, shy, fragrant, common
wild honeysuckle blossom.

Jim Dyckman was so whelmed by the youth and flavor of her that
his rapture exploded in an unsmothered gasp:

"Golly! but you're great!"

Kedzie was heartbroken. Gilfoyle had done better than that. She had
been kissed by several million dollars, and she was not satisfied!

But Dyckman was. He felt that Kedzie had solved the problem of
Charity Coe. She had cleared his soul of that hopeless obsession--he
thought--just then.




CHAPTER XVIII

When a young man suddenly goes mad in a cab, grapples the young
woman who has intrusted herself to his protection, pins her arms
to her sides, squeezes her torso till her bones crunch and she has
no breath to squawk with, then kisses her deaf and dumb and blind,
it is still a nice question which of the two is the helpless one
and which has overpowered the other.

Appearances are never more deceitful than in such attacks, and
while eye-witnesses are infrequent, they are also untrustworthy.
They cannot even tell which of the two is victim of the outrage.
The motionless gazelle in the folds of the constrictor may be in
full control of the situation.

It undoubtedly has happened, oftener than it should have, in the
history of the world that young men have made these onsets without
just provocation and have been properly slapped, horsewhipped, or
shot for their unwelcome violence. It has also happened that young
men have failed to make these onsets when they would have been
welcome.

But the perfection of the womanly art of self-pretense is when
she subtly wills the young man to overpower her and is so carried
away by her own success that she forgets who started it. She droops,
swoons, shivers before the fury of her own inspiration, and cries
out, with absolute sincerity: "How dare you! How could you! What
made you!" or simply moans, "Why, Oswald!" and resists invitingly.

Kedzie had been hoping and praying that Jim Dyckman would kiss
her, and mutely daring him to. Yet when he obeyed her tacit behest
and asked her permission she was too frightened to refuse. He was
stronger than she expected, and he held her longer. When at last
she came out for air she was shattered with a pleasant horror.

She barely had the strength to gasp, "Why, Mr. Dyckman, aren't you
awful?" and time to straighten her jumbled hat and hair when her
apartment-building drew up alongside the limousine and came to
a halt.

Dyckman pleaded, like a half-witted booby, "Let's take a little
longer ride."

But she remembered her dignity and said, with imperial scorn,
"I should hope not!"

She permitted him to help her out.

He said: "When may I see you again? Soon, please!"

She smiled, with a hurt patience, and answered, "Not for
a long while."

He chuckled: "To-morrow, eh? That's great!"

She wished that he would not say, "That's great." If he would only
say, "Ripping!" or, "I say, that's ripping!" or, "Awfully good of
you," or, "No end"--anything swagger. But he would not swagger.

He escorted her to the elevator, where she gave him a queenly hand
and murmured, "Good night!"

He watched her go up like _Medea in machina;_ then he turned
away and stumbled back into his limousine. It was still fragrant
from her presence. The perfume she was using then was a rather
aggressive essence of a lingering tenacity upon the atmosphere.
But Dyckman was so excited that he liked it. The limousine could
hardly contain him.

Kedzie felicitated herself on escaping from his thrall just in time
to avoid being stupefied by it. She thanked Heaven that she had not
flung her arms around him and claimed him for her own. She had the
cleverness of elusion that her sex displays in all the species, from
Cleopatras to clams, from butterflies to rhinoceroses. How wisely
they practise to evade what they demand, leaving the stupid male
to ponder the mysteries of womankind!

When Kedzie reached her mirror she told the approving person she
found there that she was doing pretty well for a poor young girl not
long in from the country. She postured joyously as she undressed,
and danced a feminine war-dance in much the same costume that she
wore when Jim Dyckman fished her out of the pool at Newport. She
sang:

  "I dreamt that I fell in a mar-arble pool
  With nobles and swells on all si-i-ides."

She had slapped her rescuer's hands away then and groaned to learn
that she had driven off a famous plutocrat. But now he was back;
indeed he was in the pool now, and she had him on her hook. He
had grievously disappointed her by turning out to be a commonplace
young man with no gilt on his phrases. But one must be merciful
to a million dollars.

The next morning she dreamed of him as a suitor presenting her
with a bag of gold instead of a bouquet. Just as she reached for
it the telephone rang and a hall-boyish voice told her that it was
seven o'clock.

This was the midnight alarm to Cinderella, and she became again
a poor working-girl. She had to abandon her prince and run from
the palace of dreams to the studio of toil.

She was a trifle surly when she confronted Ferriday. He studied
her, smilingly queerly and overplaying indifference:

"Have a nice dinner last night?"

Kedzie fixed him with a skewery glare: "What's your little game?
Why did you turn up missing?"

"I had another engagement. Didn't you get my note?"

"Ah, behave, behave!" said Kedzie, then blushed at the plebeian
phrase. She was beginning to have a quickly remorseful ear. As soon
as she should learn to hear her first thoughts first, and suppress
them unspoken, she would be a made lady.

"Oh, you're a true artist, Anita," said Ferriday. "Nothing can
hinder your flight into the empyrean."

"Don't sing it. Explain it," Kedzie sneered.

Ferriday laughed so delightedly that he must embrace her. She shoved
him back and brushed the imaginary dust of his contact from the
shoulders that had but lately been compressed by a million dollars.

"I see you landed him," said Ferriday.

"And I see that all your talk about loving me so much was just
a fake," said Kedzie.

"Why do you say that? I adore you."

"If you did, would you throw me at the head of another fellow?"
asked Kedzie.

"If it was for the advancement of your career, yes," Ferriday
insisted.

"What's Mr. Dyckman got to do with my career?"

"He can make it, if he doesn't break it."

"Come again."

"If you fall in love with that big thug, or if you play him for
a limousine like a chorus-girl on the make, your career is gone.
But if you use him for your future--well, I have a little scheme
that might bounce you up to the sky in a hurry. You could have your
millionaire and your fame as well."

"What's the little scheme, Ferri darling?"

"I'll tell you later. We've got to go to the projection-room and
see your new film run off. It's assembled, cut, subtitled, ready
for the market. Come along."

Kedzie went along and sat in the dark room watching the reel go by.
Her other selves came forth in troops to reveal themselves: Kedzie
the poor little shy girl, for she was that at times; Kedzie the
petulant, the revengeful, the forgiving; Kedzie on her knees in
prayer--she prayed at times, as everybody does, the most villainous
no less ardently than the most blameless; Kedzie dancing; Kedzie
flirting, in love, tempted, tipsy; Kedzie seduced, deserted,
forgiven, converted, happily married; Kedzie a mother with a little
hired baby at her little breast. There was even a picture of her
in a vision as a sweet old lady with snowy hair about her face, and
she was surrounded by grown men who were her sons, and young mothers
who were her daughters. The unending magic of the moving pictures
had enabled her to see herself as others saw her, and as she saw
herself, and as nobody should ever see her.

Kedzie doted on the picture of herself as a dear old lady leaning
on her old husband among their children. She shed tears over that
delightful, most unusual, privilege of witnessing herself peacefully,
blessedly ancient.

Whether she ever reached old age and had a husband living then
and children grown is beyond the knowledge of this chronicle or
its prophecy, for this book goes only so far as 1917. But just for
a venture, assuming Kedzie to be about twenty in 1916, that would
make Kedzie born four years back in the last century. Now, adding
sixty to 1896 brings one to 1956; and what the world will be like
then--and who'll be in it or what they may be doing, how dressing,
if at all, what riding in, fighting about, agreeing upon--it were
folly to guess at.

It is safe to say only that people will then be very much at heart
what they are to-day and were in the days when the Assyrian women
and men felt as we do about most things. Kedzie will be scolding
her children or her grandchildren and telling them that in her
day little girls did not speak disrespectfully to their parents
or run away from them or do immodest, forward things.

That much is certain to be true, as it has always been. The critics
of then will be saying that there are no great novelists in 1956 such
as there were in 1916, when giants wrote, but not for money or for
cheap sensations. They will laud the Wilsonian era when America
not only knew a millennium of golden fiction, poetry, drama, humor,
sculpture, painting, architecture, and engineering, but revealed
its greatness in moving-picture classics, in a lofty conception
of the dance as an eloquence; when the nation acted as a sister
of charity to bleeding Europe, pouring eleemosynary millions from
the cornucopia stretched across the sea, and finally entered the war
with reluctant majesty and unexampled might, her citizens unanimously
patriotic. Ye gods! even the politicians will be statesmen and their
debates classics.

Critics of then will be regretting that American fiction, poetry,
drama, art, and journalism are so inferior to foreign work, and
foreign critics will admit it and tell them why. Some military
writers will be pointing out that war is no longer possible,
and others will be crying out that it is inevitable and America
unprepared.

Doctors will be complaining that modern restlessness is creating
new nervous diseases, as doctors did in 1916 A.D., B.C., and B.A.
(which is, Before Adam). Doctors will complain that modern mothers
do not nurse their own babies--which has always been both true and
untrue--and that women do not wear enough clothes for health, not
to mention modesty.

In fact, Kedzie, if she lives, will find the spirit of the world
almost altogether what grandmothers have always found it. But Kedzie
must be left to find this out for herself.

When, then, Kedzie saw how beautifully she photographed and how well
she looked as an old lady, she wept rapturously and sighed, "I'll
never give up the pictures."

Ferriday sighed, too, for that meant to his knowing soul that she
was not long for this movie world. But he did not tell her so. He
told her:

"You're as wise as you are beautiful. You'll be as famous as you'll
be rich. And this Dyckman lad can hurry things up."

"How?" asked Kedzie, already foreseeing his game.

"The backers of the Hyperfilm Company are getting writer's cramp
in the spending hand. They call it conservatism, but it's really
cowardice. The moving-picture business has gone from the Golconda
to the gambling stage. A few years ago nearly anybody could get rich
in a minute. A lot of cheap photographers and street-car conductors
were caught in a cloudburst of money and thought they made it. They
treated money like rain, and the wastefulness in this trade has
been rivaled by nothing recent except the European war. Some of the
biggest studios are dark; some of the leaders of yesterday are so
bankrupt that their banks don't dare let 'em drop for fear they'll
bust and blow up the whole business. Most of the actors are not
getting half what they're advertised to get, but they're getting
four times what they ought to get.

"There are a few men and women who are earning even more than they
are getting, and that's a million a minute. Now, the one chance
for you, Anita, is to have some tremendous personal backing. You've
come into the game a little late. This firm you're with is tottering.
They blame me for it, but it's not my fault altogether. Anyway, this
company is riding for a fall, and down we may all go in the dust
with a dozen other big companies, any day."

Kedzie's heart stopped. In the dark she clutched Ferriday's arm so
tightly that he ouched. To have her career smashed at its beginning
would be just her luck. It grew suddenly more dear than ever, because
it was imperiled. The thought of having her pictures fail of their
mission throughout the world was as hideous as was the knowledge
to Carlyle that the only manuscript of his history was but a
shovelful of ashes.

Ferriday put his arm about her, and she crept in under his chin for
safety. She felt very cozy to him, there, and he rejoiced that he
had her his at last. Then as before he saw that he was no more to
her than an umbrella or an awning in a shower. He wanted to fling
her away; but she was still to him an invention to patent and
promote. So he told her:

"If you can persuade this Dyckman to boost your career, get behind
you with a bunch of kale and whoop up the publicity, we can stampede
the public, and the little theater managers will mob the exchanges
for reels of you. It's only a question of money, Anita. Talk about
the Archimedean lever! Give me the crowbar of advertising, and I'll
set the earth rolling the other way round so the sun will rise in
the west and print no other pictures but yours.

"There isn't room for everybody in the movie business any more.
There's room only for the people who wear lightning-rods and stand
on solid gold pedestals that won't wash away. Go after your young
millionaire, Anita, and put his money to work."

Kedzie pondered. She brought to bear on the problem all the strategic
intuition of her sex. She saw the importance of getting Dyckman's
money into circulation. She was afraid it might not be easy.

Kedzie sighed: "It's a little early for me to ask a gentleman I've
only met a couple o' times to kindly pass the millions. He must
have met a lot of women by now who've held out their hands to him
and said, 'Please,' and not got anything but the cold boiled eye.
I don't know much about millionaires, but I have a feeling that if
they started giving the money out to every girl they met, they'd
last just about as long as a real bargain does in Macy's. The women
would trample them to death and tear one another to pieces."

"But Dyckman's crazy about you, Anita. I could see it in his eyes.
He's plumb daffy."

"Maybe so and maybe not. Maybe he's that way with every girl under
forty. I've never seen him work, but I've seen him in the midst of
that Newport bunch and they've got me lashed to the mast for clothes,
looks, language, and everything."

"You're a novelty to him, Anita. He's tired of those _blasees_
creatures."

"They didn't look very blah-zay to me. They seemed to be up and doing
every minute. But supposing he was crazy about me, if I said to him,
'You can have two kisses for a million dollars apiece?' can you see
him begin to holler: 'Where am I? Please take me home!'"

Ferriday sighed: "Perhaps you're right. It wouldn't do to give
a mercenary look to your interest in him too soon. Let me talk
to him."

"What's your peculiar charm?"

"I'd put it up to him as a business proposition. I'd say, 'The
moving-picture field is the greatest gold-field in the world.' I'd
tell him how many hundred thousand theaters there are in the world,
all of them eager for your pictures and only needing to be told about
them. I'd tell him that for every dollar he put in he'd take out ten,
in addition to furthering the artistic glory of the most beautiful
genius on the dramatic horizon. I'd show him how he couldn't lose."

"But you just said--"

"Oh, I know, but we can't put on the screen everything we say in
the projection-room. And it is a fact that there is big money in
the movies."

"There must be," said Kedzie, "if as much has been sunk in 'em
as you say."

"Yes, and it's all there for the right man to dig up if he only
goes about it intelligently. Let me talk to him."

Kedzie thought hard. Then she said: "No! Not yet! You'd only scare
him away. I'll do my best to get him interested in me, and you do
your best to get him interested in the business; and then when the
time is just right we can talk turkey. But not now, Ferri, not yet."

"You're as wise as you are beautiful," said Ferriday, again. "I
can't see your beauty, but your wisdom shines in the dark. We'll
do great things together, Anita."

His arm tightened around her, reminding her that she was still
in his elbow. Before she was quite alive to his purpose his lips
touched her cheek.

"Don't do that!" she snapped. "How dare you!"

He laughed: "I forgot. The price on your kisses has just skyrocketed
to a million apiece. Don't forget my commission."

She growled pettishly. He spoke more soberly:

"You need me yet, little lady. Don't quench my enthusiasms too
roughly or I might take up some other pretty little girl as my
medium of expression. There are lots and lots of pretties born
every minute, but it takes years to make a director like me."

And she knew that this was true.

"I was only fooling," she said. "Don't be mad at me. You can kiss
me if you want to."

"I don't want to," he said, as hurt as an overgrown boy or
a prima donna.

The door opened, and a wave of light swept into the room. A voice
followed it.

"Is Miss Adair in there?"

"Yes," Kedzie answered, in confusion.

"Gent'man to see you."

It was Jim Dyckman. He followed closely and entered the room just as
Ferriday found the electric button and switched on the light.

Kedzie and Ferriday were both encouraged when they saw a look of
jealous suspicion cross his face. Ferriday hastened to explain:

"We've been editing Miss Adair's new film. Like to see an advance
edition of it?"

"Love to," said Dyckman.

"Oh, Simpson, run that last picture through again," Ferriday called
through a little hole in the wall.

A faint "All right, sir" responded.

Kedzie led Dyckman to a chair and took the next one to it.

Ferriday beamed on them and switched on the dark. Then, as if by a
divine miracle, the screen at the end of the room became a world of
life and light. People were there, and places. Mountains were swung
into view and removed. Palaces were decreed and annulled. Fields
blossomed with flowers; ballrooms swirled; streets seethed.

Anita Adair was created luminous, seraphic, composed of light and
emotion. She came so near and so large that her very thoughts seemed
to be photographed. She drifted away; she smiled, danced, wept, and
made her human appeal with angelic eloquence.

Dyckman groaned with the very affliction of her charm. She pleased
him so fiercely that he swore about it. He cried out in the dark
that she was the blank-blankest little witch in the world. Then he
groveled in apology, as if his profanity had not been the ultimate
gallantry.

When the picture was finished he turned to Kedzie and said, "My God,
you're great!" He turned to Ferriday. "Isn't she, Mr.--Fenimore?"

"I think so," said Ferriday; "and the world will think so soon."

Kedzie shook her head. "I'm only a beginner. I don't know anything
at all."

"Why, you're a genius!" Dyckman exploded. "You're simply great.
You know everything; you--"

Ferriday touched him on the arm. "We mustn't spoil her. There is
a charm and meekness about her that we must not lose."

Dyckman swallowed his other great's and after profound thought said,
"Let's lunch somewhere."

Ferriday excused himself, but said that the air would be good for
Miss Adair. She was working too hard.

So she took the air.

Dyckman had come to the studio with Charity's business as an excuse.
He had forgotten to give the excuse, and now he had forgotten the
business. He did not know that he was now Kedzie Thropp's business.
And she was minding her own business.




CHAPTER XIX

Peter Cheever was going to dictagraph to his wife. The quaint charm
of the dictagram is that the sender does not know he is sending it.
It is a good deal like an astral something or other.

Peter had often telegraphed his wife, telephoned her, and wirelessed
her. Sometimes what he had sent her was not the truth. But now
she was going to hear from him straight. She would have all the
advantages of the invisible cloak and the ring of Gyges--eavesdropping
made easy and brought to a science, a combination of perfect alibi
with intimate propinquity.

Small wonder that the device which justice has made such use of
should be speedily seized upon by other interests. Everything,
indeed, that helps virtue helps evil, too. And love and hate find
speedy employment for all the conquests that science can make upon
the physical forces of the universe.

How Charity's motives stood in heaven there is no telling. It is
safe to say that they were the usual human mixture of selfish and
altruistic, wise and foolish, honorable and impudent, profitable
and ruinous. She came by the dictagraphic idea very gradually. She
had plentiful leisure since she had taken a distaste for good works.
She had been so roughly handled by the world she was toiling for
that she decided to let it get along for a while without her.

It was a benumbing shock to learn definitely that her husband was
in liaison with a definite person, and to be confronted in shabby
clothes with that person all dressed up. When she hurried to the
Church for mercy it was desolation to learn from the pulpit that
her heart clamor for divorce was not a cleanly and aseptic impulse,
but an impious contribution to the filthy social condition of the
United States.

Charity had no one to confide in, and she had no new grievance to
air. Everybody else had evidently been long assured of her husband's
profligacy. For her to wake up to it only now and run bruiting the
stale information would be a ridiculous nuisance--a newsgirl howling
yesterday's extra to to-day's busy crowd.

Besides, she had in her time known how uninteresting and unwelcome
is the celebrant of one's own misfortunes. Husbands and wives who
tell of their bad luck are entertaining only so long as they are
spicy and sportsmanlike. When they ask for a solution they are
embarrassing, since advice is impossible for moral people. The truly
good must advise him or her either to keep quiet or to quit. But to
say "Keep quiet!" is to say "Don't disturb the adultery," while to
say "Quit!" is to say "Commit divorce!" which is far worse, according
to the best people.

We have always had adultery and got along beautifully, while divorce
is new and American and intolerable. Of course, one can and sometimes
does advise a legal separation, but that comes hard to minds that
face facts, since separation is only a license to--well, we all know
what separation amounts to; it really cannot be prettily described.

Charity, left alone at the three-forked road of divorce, complacency,
or separation, sank down and waited in dull misery for help or
solution, as do most of the poor wayfarers who come upon such a
break in their path of matrimony. She imagined Cheever with Zada and
wondered what peculiar incantations Zada used to hold him so long.
She wished that she had positive evidence against him--not for public
use, but as a weapon of self-defense. She felt that from his pulpit
Doctor Mosely had challenged her to a spiritual duel in that sermon
against divorce and remarriage of either guilty or innocent.

Also she began to want to get evidence to silence her own soul with.
She wanted to get over loving Cheever. To want to be cured of such
an ailment is already the beginning of cure.

Abruptly the idea came to her to put a detective on the track of
Zada and Cheever. She had no acquaintance in that field, and it was
a matter of importance that she should not put herself in the hands
of an indelicate detective. She ought to have consulted a lawyer
first, but her soul preferred the risk of disaster to the shame
of asking counsel.

She consulted the newspapers and found a number of advertisements,
some of them a little too mysterious, a little too promiseful. But
she took a chance on the Hodshon & Hindley Bureau, especially as it
advertised a night telephone, and it was night when she reached her
decision.

She surprised Mr. Hodshon in the bosom of his family. He was dandling
a new baby in the air and trying not to step on the penultimate
child, who was treating one of his legs as a tree. When the telephone
rang he tossed the latest edition to its mother and hobbled to the
table, trying to tear loose the clinger, for it does not sound well
to hear a child gurgling at a detective's elbow.

When Charity told Hodshon who she was his eyes popped and he was
greatly excited. When she asked Mr. Hodshon to call at once he looked
at his family and his slippers and said he didn't see how he could
till the next day. Charity did not want to go to a detective's office
in broad daylight or to have anybody see a detective coming to her
house. She had an idea that a detective could be recognized at once
by his disguise. He probably could be if he wore one; and he usually
can be, anyway, if any one is looking for him. But she could not get
Hodshon till she threatened to telephone elsewhere. At that, he said
he would postpone his other engagement and come right up.

Charity was disappointed in Mr. Hodshon. He looked so ordinary,
and yet he must know such terrible things about people. We always
expect doctors, lawyers, priests, and detectives to show the scars
of the searing things they know. As if we did not all of us know
enough about ourselves and others to eat our eyes out, if knowledge
were corrosive!

Charity was further disappointed in Hodshon's lack of
picturesqueness. He was like no detective she had read about
between Sherlock Holmes and Philo Gubb. He was like no detective
at all. It was almost impossible to accept him as her agent.

He seemed eager to help, however, and when she told him that she
suspected her husband of being overly friendly with an insect named
Zada L'Etoile, and that she wanted them shadowed, he betrayed a
proper agitation.

Now, of course, women's scandals are no more of a luxury to a
detective than their legs were to the bus-driver of tradition or to
any one in knee-skirted 1916. Mr. Hodshon was a good man as good men
go, though he was capable of the little dishonesties and compromises
with truth that characterize every profession. A man simply cannot
succeed as a teacher, lawyer, doctor, merchant, thief, author,
scientist, or anything else if he blurts out everything he knows
or believes. No preacher could occupy a pulpit for two Sundays who
told just what he actually thought or knew or could find out. The
detective is equally compelled to manipulate the truth.

Hodshon gave his soul to Charity's cause. He outlined the various
ways of establishing Cheever's guilt and promised that the agency
would keep him shadowed and make a record of all his hours.

"It'll take some time to get the goods on 'em good," he explained,
"but there's ways we got. When we learn what we got to know we'll
arrange it and tip you off. Then you and me will go to the door and
break in on the parties at the right moment, and--"

"No, Thank You!" said Charity, with a firm pressure on each word.

"You better get some friend to go with us, for a detective needs
c'roboration, you know. The courts won't accept a detective's
uns'ported testimony. And if you could know what some of these
crooks are capable of you wouldn't wonder. Is that all right? We
get the goods on 'em and you have a friend ready, and we'll bust
in on the parties, and--"

"No, thank you!" said Charity, with undiminished enthusiasm.

This stumped Mr. Hodshon. She amazed him further. "I don't intend
to bring this case into court. I don't want to satisfy any judge
but myself."

But what he had said about the credibility of the unsupported
detective had set Charity to thinking. It would be folly to pay
these curious persons to collect evidence that was worthless when
collected. She mused aloud:

"Would it be possible--of course it wouldn't--but if it were, what
I should like would be to be able to see my hu--Mr. Ch--those two
persons without their knowing about it at all. Of course that's
impossible, isn't it?"

"Well, it was a few years ago, but we can do wonders nowadays.
There's the little dictagraph. We could string one up for you and
give you the usual stenographic report--or you could go and listen
in yourself."

"Could I really?" Charity gasped, and she began to shiver with
the frightfulness of the opportunity.

"Surest thing you know," said Hodshon.

"But how could you install a dictagraph without their finding
it out?"

"Easiest thing you know. We'll probably have to rent an apartment
in the same building or another one near-by, and--one of the
hall-boys there may be workin' for us now. If not, we can usually
bring him in. There's a hundred ways to get into a house and put
the little dictor behind a picture or somewheres and lead the wire
out to us."

"But can you really hear--if they talk low?" Charity mumbled,
with dread.

"Let 'em whisper!" said Hodshon. "The little fellow just eats
a whisper. Leave it to us, madam, and we'll surprise you."

The compact was made. Charity suggested an advance payment as a
retainer, and Hodshon permitted her to write a check and hand it
to him before he assured her that it wasn't necessary.

He went away and left Charity in a state of nerves. Her curiosity
was a mania, but she feared that assuaging it might leave her in a
worse plight. She hated herself for her enterprise and was tempted
to cancel it. But when she heard Cheever come home at midnight and
go to his room without speaking to her she felt a grim resentment
toward him that was like a young hate with a big future.

Every night Charity received a typewritten document describing
Cheever's itinerary for the day. The mute, inglorious Boswell took
him up at the front steps, heeled him to his office, out to lunch,
back to the office, thence to wherever he went.

The name of Zada did not appear in the first report at all, but on
the second day she met Cheever at luncheon, and he went shopping with
her. Charity, reading, flushed to learn that he bought her neither
jewelry nor hats, but household supplies and delicacies. He went with
her to her apartment and thence with her to dinner and the theater
and then back, and thence again after an hour to his home.

The minute chronicle of his outdoor doings, intercalated with the
maddening bafflement of his life in that impenetrable apartment, made
such dramatic reading as Charity had never known. She grew haggard
with waiting for the arrival of her little private daily newspaper.
When she saw Cheever she could hardly keep from screaming at him
what she knew. His every entrance into the house became a hideous
insult. She felt that it was herself who was the kept woman and not
the other.

She longed to take the documents and visit the Reverend Doctor Mosely
with them, make him read them and tell her if he still thought it was
her duty to endure such infamy. She felt that the good doctor would
advise her to lay them before Cheever and confound him with guilt,
bring him to what the preachers call "a realizing sense" of it and
win him home.

She was tempted to try the imaginary advice on Cheever, but something
held her back. She wondered what it was, till suddenly she came to
a realizing sense of one fearful bit of news: her soul had so changed
toward him, her love had turned to such disgust, that she was afraid
he might come back to her! He might cast off his discovered partner
in guilt and renew his old claim to Charity's soul and body. That
would be degradation indeed!

Now she was convinced that her love had starved even unto death, that
it was a corpse in her home, corrupted the air and must be removed.




CHAPTER XX

Kedzie lay extended on her _chaise longue_, looking as much
unlike Madame Recamier as one could look who was so pretty a woman.
A Sunday supplement dropped from her hand and joined the heap of
papers on the floor. Kedzie was tired of looking at pictures of
herself.

She had had to look over all the papers, since she was in them all.
At least her other self, Anita Adair, was in them.

In every paper there was a large advertisement with a large picture
of her and the names of the theaters at which she would appear
simultaneously in her new film. In the critical pages devoted to
the moving-picture world there were also pictures of her and at least
a little text.

In two or three of the papers there were interviews with the new
comet; in others were articles by her. These entertained her at
first, because she had never seen the interviewers or the articles.
She had not thought many of the thoughts attached to her name. The
press agent of the Hyperfilm Company had written everything. He
reveled in his new star, for the editors were cordial toward her
"press stuff." They "ate it up," "gave it spread."

This was the less surprising since the advertising-man of the
Hyperfilm Company was so lavish with purchase of space that the
publishers could well afford to throw in a little free reading
matter--especially since it did not cost them a cent for the copy.

The press agent unaided has a hard life, but when the advertising-man
gives him his arm he is welcome to the most select columns.

In some of the interviews Kedzie gave opinions she had never held on
themes she had never heard of. When she read that her favorite poet
was Rabindranath Tagore she wondered who that "gink" was. When she
read that she owed her figure to certain strenuous flexion exercises
she decided that they might be worth trying some day. Her advice to
beginners in the motion-picture field proved very interesting. She
wondered how she had ever got along without it.

She was greatly excited by an article of hers in which she told of
the terrific adventures she had had in and out of the studio; there
was one time when an angry tiger would have torn her to pieces if she
had not had the presence of mind to play dead. She read of another
occasion when she had either to spoil a good film or endanger her
existence as the automobile she was steering refused to answer the
brake and plunged over a cliff. Of course she would not ruin the
film. By some miracle she escaped with only a few broken bones, and
after a week in the hospital returned to the interrupted picture.
These old stories were told with such simple sincerity that she
almost believed them. But she tossed them aside and sneered:

"Bunc!"

She yawned over her own published portraits--and to be able to do
that is to be surfeited indeed.

Suddenly Kedzie stopped purring, thought fiercely, whirled to her
flank; her hands went among the papers. She remembered something,
found it at last, an article she had glanced at and forgotten
for the moment.

She snatched it up and read. It discussed the earning powers of
several film queens. It credited them with salaries ten or twenty
times as much as hers. Two or three of them had companies of their
own with their names at the head of their films.

Kedzie groaned. She rose and paced the floor, shamed, trapped,
humbled. The misers of the Hyperfilm Company paid her a beggarly
hundred dollars a week! merely featured her among other stars of
greater magnitude, while certain women had two thousand a week
and were "incorporated," whatever that was!

Kedzie longed to get at Ferriday and tell him what a sneak he was
to lure her into such a web and tie her up with such cheap ropes.
She would break her bonds and fling them in his face.

She slid abruptly to the floor and began to go over the film
pages again, comparing her portraits with the portraits of those
higher-paid creatures. She hated vanity and could not endure it in
other women; it was a mere observation of a self-evident fact that
she was prettier than all the other film queens put together. She
sat there sneering at the presumptuousness of screen idols whom she
had almost literally worshiped a year before.

Then something gave her pause. The celluloid-queens had certain
pages allotted to them, the actresses certain pages.

But there was another realm where women were portrayed in fashionable
gowns--debutantes, brides, matrons. And their realm was called "The
Social World." These women toiled not, earned not; they only spent
money and time as they pleased. They were in "society," and she was
out of it. They were ladies and she was a working-woman.

Now Kedzie's cake was dough indeed. Now her pride was shame. She
did not want to be a film queen. She did not want to work for any
sum a week. She wanted to be a debutante and a bride and a matron.

She had never had a coming-out party, and never would have. She
studied the aristocrats, put their portraits on her dressing-table
and tried to copy their simple grandeur in her mirror. But she
lacked a certain something. She didn't know a human being who was
swell to use as a model.

Oh yes, she did--one--Jim Dyckman.

A dark design came to her to dally with him no longer. He had dragged
her out of that pool at Newport; now he must drag her into the swim.

The telephone-bell rang. The hall-boy said:

"A gen'leman to see you--Mistoo Ferriday."

"Send him along."

"He's on the way now."

"Oh, all right."

As Kedzie hung up the receiver it occurred to her that this little
interchange was about the un-swellest thing she had ever done. She
had been heedless of the convenances. Her business life made her
responsible only to herself, and she felt able to take care of
herself anywhere.

Now it came over her that she could not aspire to aristocracy and
allow negro hall-boys to send men up in the elevator and telephone
her afterward. She snatched up the telephone and said:

"That you?"

"Yassum, Miss Adair."

"How dare you send anybody up without sending the name up first?"

"Why, you nevva--"

"Who do you think I am that I permit anybody to walk in on me?"

"Why, we alwiz--"

"The idea of such a thing! It's disgraceful."

"Why, I'm sorry, but--"

"Don't ever do it again."

"No'm."

She slapped the receiver on the hook and fumed again, realizing that
a something of elegance had been lacking in her tirade.

The door-bell rang, and she did not wait for her maid, but answered
it in angry person. Ferriday beamed on her.

"Oh, it's you. You didn't stop to ask if I was visible. You just
came right on up, didn't you?"

He whispered: "Pardon me. Somebody else is here. Exit laughingly!"

That was insult on insult.

"Stop it! There is not anybody else. Come back. What do you want?"

He came back, his laughter changed to rage.

"Look here, you impudent little upstart from nowhere! I invented you,
and if you're not careful I'll destroy you."

"Is that so?" she answered; then, like Mr. Charles Van Loan's
baseball hero, she realized with regret that the remark was not
brilliant as repartee.

Ferriday was too wroth to do much better:

"Yes, that's so. You little nobody!"

"Nobody!" she laughed, pointing to the newspapers spangled with
her portraits.

Ferriday snorted, "Paid for by Jim Dyckman's money."

"What do you mean--Jim Dyckman's money?"

"Oh, when I saw how idiotic he was over you, and how slow you were
in landing him, and when I realized that the Hyperfilm Company was
going to slide your pictures out with no special advertising, I went
to him and tried to get him into the business."

"You had a nerve!"

"Praise from Lady Hubert!"

"Whoever she is! Well, did he bite?"

"Yes and no. He's not such a fool as he looks in your company. He
has a hard head for business; he wouldn't invest a cent."

"I thought you said--"

"But he has a soft head for you. He said he wouldn't invest a cent
in the firm, but he'd donate all I could use for you. It was to be
a little secret present. He told me you refused to accept presents
from him. Did you?"

Kedzie blushed before his cynic understanding.

He laughed: "You're all right. You know the game, but you've got
to quicken your speed. You're taking too much footage in getting
to the climax."

Kedzie was still incandescent with the new information:

"And Jim Dyckman paid for my advertising?"

"On condition that his name was kept out of it. That's why you're
famous. You couldn't have got your face in a paper if you had been
fifty times as pretty if he hadn't swamped the papers with money.
And he would never have thought of it if I hadn't gone after him.
So you'd better waste a little politeness on me or your first flare
will be your last."

Kedzie acknowledged his conquest, bowed her head, and pouted up
at him with such exquisite impudence that he groaned:

"I don't know whether I ought to kiss you or kill you."

"Take your choice, my master," Kedzie cooed.

He snarled at her: "I guess the news I bring will do for you. There
was a fire in the studio last night. You didn't know of it?"

Kedzie, dumbly aghast, shook her head.

"If you'd read any part of the newspapers except your own press stuff
you'd have seen that there was a war in Europe yesterday and a fire
in New York last night. I was there trying to save what I could.
I got a few blisters and not much else. Most of your unfinished work
is finished--gone up in smoke."

"You don't mean that my beautiful, wonderful films are destroyed?"

He nodded--then caught her as her knees gave way. He felt a stab of
pity for her as he dragged her to her _chaise longue_ and let
her fall there. She was dazed with the shock.

She had been indifferent to the destruction of fortresses and
cathedrals--even of Rheims, with its titanic granite lace. She had
read, or might have read, of the airship that dropped a bomb through
the great fresco in Venice where Tiepolo revealed his unequaled
mastery of aerial perspective, taking the eye up through the dome
and the human witnesses, cloud by cloud, past the hierarchies
of angels, past Christ and the Mother of God, on up to Jehovah
himself, bending down from infinite heights. The eternal loss of
this picture meant nothing to her. But the destruction of her own
recorded smiles and tears and the pretty twistings and turnings of
her young body--that was cataclysm.

She was like everybody else, in that no multiplication of other
people's torments could be so vivid as the catching of her own thumb
in a door. Kedzie was too crushed to weep. This little personal
Pompeii brought to the dust all the palaces and turrets of her hope
upon her head. She whispered to Ferriday:

"What are you going to do? Must you make them over again?"

He shook his head. "The Hyperfilm Company will probably shut up
shop now."

"And let my pictures die?"

He nodded.

She beckoned him close and clung to him, babbling: "What will become
of me? Oh, my poor pictures! My pretty pictures! The company owes me
a week's salary. And I had counted on the money. What's to become of
me?"

Ferriday resented her eternal use of him for her own advantages.
"Why do you appeal to me? Where's your friend Dyckman?"

"I was to see him this evening--dine with him."

"Well, he can build you ten new studios and not feel it. Better ask
him to set you up in business."

Kedzie revolted at this, but she had no answer. Ferriday saw the
papers folded open at the society pages. He stared at them, at her,
then sniffed:

"So that's your new ambition!"

"What?"

"'In the Social World!' You want to get in with that gang, eh? Has
Dyckman asked you to marry him?"

"Of course not."

"Well, if he does, don't ever let him take you into his own set."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Just to warn you. Those social worldlings wouldn't stand for you,
Anita darling. You can make monkeys of us poor men. But those queens
will make a little scared worm out of you and step on you. And they
won't stop smiling for one minute."

"Is that so?" Kedzie snarled. There it was again.

The telephone rang. Kedzie answered it. The hall-boy timidly
announced:

"Mistoo Dyckman is down year askin' kin he see you. Kin he?"

"Send him up, please," said Kedzie. Then she turned to Ferriday.
"He's here--at this hour! I wonder why."

"I'd better slope."

"Do you mind?"

"Not in the least. I'll go up a flight of stairs and take the
elevator after His Majesty has finished with it. Good-by.
Get busy!"

He slid out, and Kedzie scurried about her primping. The bell rang.
She sent her maid to the door. Dyckman came in. She let him wait
awhile--then went to him with an elegiac manner.

She accepted his salute on a martyr-white brow. He said:

"I read about the fire. I was scared to death for you till I learned
that all the people were safe. I motored up to see the ruins. Some
ruins! Like to see'em?"

"I don't think I could stand the sight of them. They're my ruins,
too."

"How so?"

"Because the company won't rebuild or go on, and most of my pictures
were destroyed."

"Your pretty, beautiful, gorgeous pictures gone! Oh, God help us!
That's too terrible to believe."

She sighed, "It's true."

"Why, I'd rather lose the Metropolitan Art Gallery than your films.
Can't they be made over?"

"They could, but who's to stand the expense?"

"I will, if you'll let me."

"Mr. Dyckman!"

"I thought we'd agreed that my name was Jim."

"Jim! You would do that for me!"

"Why not?"

"But why so?"

"Because--why, simply--er--it's the most natural thing in the world,
seeing that--Well, you're not sitting there pretending that you don't
know I love you, are you?"

"Oh dear, oh dear! It's too wonderful to believe, you angel!"

And then for the first time she flung her arms about his neck and
kissed him and hugged him, knelt on his lap and clasped him fiercely.

He felt as if a simoom of rapture had struck him, and when she told
him a dozen times that she loved him he could think of nothing to
say but, "Say, this is great!"

She forgave him the banality this time. When she had calmed herself
a little she said:

"But it would mean a frightful lot of money."

"Whatever it costs, it's cheap--considering this." He indicated
her arm about his neck. "I wouldn't let the world be robbed of
the pictures of you, Anita, not for any money." He told her to tell
Ferriday to make the arrangements and send the estimates to him. And
he said, "I won't ask you to quit being photographed, even when we
are married."

"When we are married?" Kedzie parroted.

"Of course! That's where we're bound for, isn't it? Where else could
we pull up--that is, of course, assuming that you'll do me the honor
of anchoring a great artist like you up to a big dub like me. Will
you?"

"Why--why--I'd like to think it over; this is so sudden."

"Of course, you'd better think it over, you poor angel!"

Kedzie could not think what else to say or even what to think. The
word "marriage" reminded her that she had what the ineffable Bunker
Bean would have called "a little old last year's husband" lying
around in the garret of her past.

She went almost blind with rage at that beast of a Gilfoyle who had
dragged her away and married her while she was not thinking. He must
have hypnotized her or drugged her. If only she could quietly murder
him! But she didn't even know where he was.




CHAPTER XXI

The investigations of Messrs. Hodshon & Hindley in the life of Zada
and Cheever prospered exceedingly. In blissless ignorance of it,
Zada had been inspired to set a firm of sleuths on Charity's trail.
She wanted to be able to convince Cheever that Charity was intrigued
with Dyckman. The operators who kept Mrs. Charity Coe Cheever under
espionage had the most stupid things to report to Zada.

To Zada's disgust, Mrs. Cheever never called upon Jim Dyckman, and
he never called on her. Zada accused the bureau of cheating her,
and finally put another agency to shadowing Jim Dyckman. According
to the reports she had, his neglect of Mrs. Cheever was perfectly
explained. He was a mere satellite of a moving-picture actress,
a new-comer named Anita Adair.

The detectives reported that such gossip as they could pick up about
the studio indicated that Dyckman was putting money into the firm
on her account.

"A movie angel!" sneered Zada. She had wasted a hundred dollars on
him to find this out, and two hundred and fifty on Mrs. Cheever to
find out that she was intensely respectable. That was bitter news
to Zada. She canceled her business with her detective agency. And
they called in the shadows that haunted Charity's life.

The detectives on Zada's trail, however, had more rewarding material
to work with--although they found unexpected difficulties, they said,
in getting the dictagraph installed in her apartment. They did not
wish to ruin the whole enterprise by too great haste--especially as
they were receiving eight dollars a day and liberal expenses per man.

At last, however, Hodshon sent word to Mrs. Cheever that the
dictagraph was installed and working to a T, and she could listen-in
whenever she was ready.

Charity was terrified utterly now. New scales were to be shaken
from her eyes at the new tree of knowledge. She was to hear her man
talking to his leman.

She had almost an epilepsy of terror, but she could not resist the
importunate opportunity.

She selected from her veils a heavy crepe that she had worn during
a period of mourning for one of her husband's relatives. It seemed
appropriate now, for she was going into mourning for her own husband,
living, yet about to die to her.

She left the house alone after dark and walked along Fifth Avenue
till she found a taxicab. She gave the street number Hodshon had
given her and stepped in. She kept an eye on the lighted clock and
in the dark sorted out the exact change and a tip, adding dimes as
they were recorded on the meter. She did not want to have to pause
for change, and she did not wish to make herself conspicuous by an
extravagant tip.

As the taxicab slid along the Avenue Charity wondered if any of the
passengers in other cabs could have an errand so gruesome as hers.
She was tortured by fantastic imaginings of what she might hear. She
wondered how a man would talk to such a person as Zada, and how she
would answer. She imagined the most dreadful things she could.

The taxicab surprised her by stopping suddenly before a brown-fronted
residence adjoining an apartment-house of (more or less literally)
meretricious ornateness. She stepped out, paid her fare, and turned,
to find Mr. Hodshon at her elbow. He had been waiting for her. He
recognized her by her melodramatic veil. He gave her needed help up
a high stoop and opened the door with a key.

She found herself in a shabby, smelly hall where no one else was.

He motioned her up the stairway, and she climbed with timidity. At
each level there were name-plates over the electric buttons. The
very labels seemed illicit. Hodshon motioned her up and up for four
flights.

Then he opened a door and stepped back to let her enter a room
unfurnished except for a few chairs and a table. Two men were in
the room, and they were laughing with uproar. One of them had a
telephone-receiver clamped to his ear, and he was making shorthand
notes, explaining to his companion what he heard.

They turned in surprise at Hodshon's entrance and rose to greet
Charity with the homage due so great a client.

Charity could hardly bespeak them civilly. They took her curtness
for snobbery, but it was not. It swept over her that these people
were laughing over her most sacred tragedy.

She advanced on the operator and put out her hand for the headpiece
he wore. He took it off and rubbed it with his handkerchief, and
told her that she must remove her hat and veil.

She came out startlingly white and brilliant from the black. She
put the elastic clamp over her head and set the receiver to her
ear. Instantly she was assailed by dreadful noises, a jangle of
inarticulate sounds like the barking of two dogs.

"I can't hear a word," she protested.

"They're talkin' too loud," said the operator. "The only way to beat
the dictagraph is to cut the wire or yell."

"Are they quarreling, then?" Charity asked, almost with pleasure.

"Yes, ma'am. But it's the lady and her maid. They been havin' a
terrible scrap about marketin'. He--Mr. Cheever--ain't there yet.
They're expectin' him, though."

Charity felt that she had plumbed the depths of degradation in
listening to a quarrel between such a creature and her maid. What
must it be to be the maid of such a creature! She was about to
snatch away the earpiece when she heard the noise of a door opening.
She looked toward the entrance of the room she was in, but the door
that opened was in the other room in the other building.

The voices of Zada and her maid stopped jangling, and she heard
the most familiar of all voices asking:

"What's the row to-day?"

There was an extra metal in the timbre and it had the effect of an
old phonographic record, but there was no questioning whose voice
it was.

Zada's voice became audibly low in answer.

"She is such a fool she drives me crazy."

A sullen, servile voice answered: "It ain't me's the fool, and as
for crazy--her wantin' me to bring home what they ain't in no market.
How'm I goin' to git what ain't to be got, I asts you. This here war
is stoppin' ev'y kind of food."

Cheever's answer was characteristic. He didn't believe in servants'
rights.

"Get out. If you're impudent again I'll throw you out, and your
baggage after you."

"Yassar," was the soft answer.

There was the sound of shuffling feet and a softly closed door.
Then Zada's voice, very mellow:

"I thought you'd never come, dearie."

"Awfully busy to-day, honey."

"You took dinner with her, of course."

"No. It was a big day on the Street, and there was so much to do at
the office that I dined down-town at the Bankers' Club with several
men and then went back to the office. I ought to be there all night,
but I couldn't keep away from you any longer."

There were mysterious quirks of sound that meant kisses and sighs and
tender inarticulations. There were cooing tones which the dictagraph
repeated with hideous fidelity.

Zada asked, "Did he have hard daydie old office-ums?"

And he answered, with infatuated imbecility, "Yes, he diddums, but
worst was lonelying for his Zadalums."

"Did Peterkin miss his Zadalums truly--truly?"

The inveterate idioms of wooers took on in Charity's ear a grotesque
obscenity, a sacrilegious burlesque of words as holy to her as prayer
or the sacred dialect of priests. When Zada murmured, "Kissings!
kissings!" Charity screamed: "Stop it, you beasts! You beasts!"

Then she clapped her hand over her lips, expecting to hear their
panic at her outcry. But they were as oblivious of her pain or her
rage as if an interplanetary space divided them. They went on with
the murmur and susurrus of their communion, while Charity looked
askance at the three men. They could not hear, but could imagine,
and they stared at her doltishly.

"Leave the room! Go away!" she groaned.

They slipped out through the door and left her to her shame.

In the porches of her ear the hateful courtship purled on with its
tender third-personal terms and its amorous diminutives, suffixed
ridiculously.

"Zada was afaid her booful Peterkin had forgotten her and gone to
the big old house."

"Without coming home first?"

"Home! that's the wordie I want. This is his homie, isn't it,
Peterkin?"

"Yessy."

"He doesn't love old villain who keeps us apart?"

"Nonie, nonie."

"Never did, did he?"

"Never."

"Only married her, didn't he?"

"That's allie."

"Zada is only really wifie?"

"Only onlykins."

Charity listened with a greed of self-torment like a fanatic
penitent. The chatter of the two had none of the indecency she
had expected, and that made it the more intolerably indecent.

She saw that Cheever's affair with Zada had settled down to a state
of comfort, of halcyon delight.

It had taken on domestication. He was at home with her and an alien
in Charity's home. He told the woman his business affairs and little
office jokes. He laughed with a purity of cheer that he had long lost
in his legal establishment. He used many of the love-words that he
had once used to Charity, and her heart was wrung with the mockery
of it.

Charity listened helplessly. She was as one manacled or paralyzed and
submitted to such a torture as she had never endured. She harkened
in vain for some hopeful note of uncongeniality, some reassurance
for her love or at least her vanity, some certainty that her husband,
her first possessor, had given her some emotion that he could never
give another. But he was repeating to Zada the very phrases of his
honeymoon, repeating them with all the fervor of a good actor playing
Romeo for the hundredth time with his new leading lady. Indeed, he
seemed to find in Zada a response and a unity that he had never found
in Charity's society. Her intelligence was cruelly goaded to the
realization that she had never been quite the woman for Cheever.

She had known that he had not been the full complement of her own
soul. They had disagreed fiercely on hundreds of topics. He had been
chilled by many of her ardors, as many of his interests had bored
her. She had supposed it to be an inevitable inability of a man and
a woman to regard the world through the same eyes. She had let him
go his way and had gone her own. And now it seemed that he had in
his wanderings found some one who mated him exactly. The butterfly
had liked the rose, but had fluttered away; when it found the orchid
it closed its wings and rested content.

It was a frightful revelation to Charity, for it meant that Cheever
had been merely flirting with her. She had caught his eye as a girl
in a strange port captivates a sailor. He had haunted her window
with serenades. Finding her to be what we call "a good girl," he had
called upon her father and mother that he might talk to her longer.
And then he had gone to church with her and married her that he might
get rid of her father and mother and her own scruples. And so he had
made her his utterly, and after a few days and nights had sailed away.
He had come back to her now and then as a sailor does.

Meanwhile in another port he had found what we call "a bad woman."
There had been no need to serenade her out into the streets. They
were her shop. No parents had guarded her hours; no priest was
intermediary to her possession. But once within her lair he had
found himself where he had always wanted to be, and she had found
herself with the man she had been hunting. She closed her window,
drove her frequenters, old and new, from the door; and he regretted
that he had given pledges to that other woman.

It was a pitiful state of affairs, no less pitiful for being old
and ugly and innumerously commonplace. It meant that Cheever under
the white cloak of matrimony had despoiled Charity of her innocence,
and under the red domino of intrigue had restored to Zada hers.

If Charity, sitting like a recording angel, invisible but hearing
everything, had found in the communion of Zada and Cheever only
the fervor of an amour, she could have felt that Cheever was merely
a libertine who loved his wife and his home but loved to rove as
well. She had, however, ghastly evidence that Cheever was only now
the rake reformed; his marriage had been merely one of his escapades;
he had settled down now to monogamy with Zada, and she was his wife
in all but style and title.

There was more of Darby and Joan than of Elvira and Don Juan in
their conversation. He told Zada with pride that he had not had a
drink all day, though he had needed alco-help and the other men had
ridiculed him. She told him that she had not had a drink for a week
and only one cigarette since her lonely dinner. They were in a state
of mutual reformation!

Where, then, was the sacrament of marriage? Which of the women held
the chalice now?

It was enforced on Charity that it was she and not Zada who had
been the inspirer and the victim of Cheever's flitting appetite.
It was Zada and not she who had won him to the calm, the dignity,
the sincerity, the purity that make marriage marriage. It was a hard
lesson for Charity, and she did not know what she ought to do with
her costly knowledge. She could only listen.

When Zada complained that she had had a dreadful day of blues Cheever
made jokes for her as for a child, and she laughed like the child
she was. For her amusement he even went to a piano and played, with
blundering three-chord accompaniment, a song or two. He played jokes
on the keyboard. He revealed none of the self-consciousness that he
manifested before Charity when he exploited his little bag of
parlor tricks.

Charity's mood had changed from horror to eager curiosity, and thence
to cold despair, to cold resentment. It went on to cold intelligence
and a belief that her life with Cheever was over. Their marriage was
a proved failure, and any further experiments with its intimacies
would be unspeakably vile. Or so she thought.

She had consented to this dictagraphic inspection of her husband's
intrigue merely to confirm or refute gossip. She had had more than
evidence enough to satisfy her. Her first reaction to it was a
primitive lust for revenge.

Once or twice she blazed with such anger that she rose to tear the
wire loose from the wall and end the torment. But her curiosity
restrained her. She set the earpiece to her ear again.

At length she formed her resolution to act. She called out,
"Mr. Hodshon, come here!"

He came in and found her a pillar of rage.

"I've heard enough. I'll do what I refused before. I'll go with you
and break in."

Hodshon was dazed. He was not ready to act. She had refused his plan
to break in according to the classic standards. He had let the plan
lapse and accepted Mrs. Cheever as a poor rich wretch whom he had
contracted to provide with a certain form of morbid entertainment.
He could do nothing now but stammer:

"Well--well--is that so? Do you really? You know you didn't--
O' course--Well, let's see now. You know we ain't prepared. I told
you we had to have a c'rob'rating witness. It wouldn't be legal if we
were to--Still, they probably would accept you as witness and us as
corroboration, but you wouldn't want to go on the stand and tell what
you found--not a nice refined lady like you are. The witness-stand
is no place for a lady, anyway.

"The thing is if you could get some gentleman friend to go with you
and you two break in. Then you'd both be amateurs, kind of. You see?
Do you know any gentleman who might be willing to do that for you?
The best of friends get very shy when you suggest such a job. But
if you know anybody who would be interested and wanted to help
you--Do you?"

Only two names came to Charity's searching mind--Jim Dyckman's
impossible name and one that was so sublimely unfit that she laughed
as she uttered it.

"There's the Reverend Doctor Mosely."

Hodshon tried to laugh.

"I was reading head-lines of a sermon of his. He's down on divorce."

"That's why he'd be the ideal witness," said Charity.

"But would he come?"

"Of course not," she laughed. "There's no use of carrying this
further. I've had all I can stand to-night. Let me go."

As usual with people who have had all they can stand, Charity wanted
some more. She glanced at the receiver, curious as to what winged
words had flown unattended during her parley with Hodshon.

She put the receiver to her ear and fell back. Again she was greeted
with clamor. They were quarreling ferociously.

That might mean either of two things: there are the quarrels that
enemies maintain, and those that devoted lovers wage. The latter
sort are perhaps the bitterer, the less polite. Charity could not
learn what had started the wrangle between those two.

Slowly it died away. Zada's cries turned to sobs, and her tirade
to sobs.

"You don't love me. Go back to her. You love her still."

"No, I don't, honey. I just don't want her name brought into our
conversation. It doesn't seem decent, somehow. It's like bringing
her in here to listen to our quarrels. I'm sorry I hurt you. I'm
trying not to, but you're so peculiarly hard to keep peace with
lately. What's the reason, darling?"

Charity was smitten with a fear more terrible than any yet. She
heard its confirmation. Zada whispered:

"Can't you guess?"

"No, I can't."

"Stupid!" Zada murmured. "You poor, stupid boy."

Charity heard nothing for a long moment--then a gasp.

"Zada!"

She greeted his alarm with a chuckle and a flurry of proud laughter.
He bombarded her with questions:

"Why didn't you tell me? How long? What will you do? How could
you?--you're no fool."

Her answers were jumbled with his questions--his voice terrified,
hers victorious.

"I've kept it a secret for months, because I was afraid of you.
It's my right. It's too late to do anything now. And now we'll see
whether you love me or not--and how much, if any."

There was again silence. Charity could hardly tolerate the suspense.
Both she and Zada were hanging breathlessly on Cheever's answer.

He did not speak for so long that Zada gave up. "You don't love me,
then? I'd better kill myself, I suppose. It's the only solution now.
And I'm willing, since you don't love me enough."

"No, no--yes, I do. I adore you--more than ever. But it's such a
strange ambition for you; and, God! what a difference it makes,
what a difference!"

That was what Charity thought. For once she agreed with Cheever,
echoed his words and his dismay and stood equally stunned before
the new riddle. It was a perfect riddle now, for there was no end
to the answers, and every one of them was wrong.




CHAPTER XXII

Charity let the receiver fall. She had had enough. She sank into
a chair and would have slipped to the floor, but her swimming eyes
made out the blurred face of Hodshon, terrified at her pallor.

If she fainted he would resuscitate her. She could not add that
to her other ignominies. She clenched herself like one great fist
of resolution till the swoon was frustrated. She sat still for
a while--then rose, put on her hat, swathed her face in the veil,
and went down the flights of stairs and out into the cool, dark
street.

She had forgotten that she had dismissed the taxicab. Fortunately
another was lurking in the lee of the apartment-house. Hodshon
summoned it and would have ridden home with her, but she forbade
him. She passed on the way the church of Doctor Mosely and his
house adjoining. She was tempted to stop, but she was too weary
for more talk.

She slept exceedingly well that night, so well that when she woke
she regretted that she had not slept on out of the world. She fell
asleep again, but was trampled by a nightmare. She woke trying to
scream. Her eyes, opening, found her beautiful room about her and
the dream dangers vanished.

But the horrors of her waking hours of yesterday had not vanished.
They were waiting for her. She could not end them by the closing
of her eyes. In the cool, clear light of day she saw still more
problems than before--problems crying for decisions and contradicting
each other with a hopeless conflict of moralities. To move in any
direction was to commit ugly deeds; to move in no direction was to
commit the ugliest of all.

She rang for her coffee, and she could hardly sit up to it. Her maid
cried out at her age-worn look, and begged her to see a doctor.

"I'm going to as soon as I'm strong enough," said Charity Coe. But
she meant the Reverend Doctor Mosely. She thought that she could
persuade even him that surgery was necessary upon that marriage. At
any rate, she determined to force a decision from him. She telephoned
the unsuspecting old darling, and he readily consented to see her.
She spent an hour or two going over her Bible and concordance. They
gave her little comfort in her plight.

When finally she dragged herself from her home to Doctor Mosely's his
butler ushered her at once into the study. Doctor Mosely welcomed her
both as a grown-up child and as an eminent dealer in good deeds.

She went right at her business. "Doctor Mosely, I loathe myself for
adding to the burdens your parish puts upon your dear shoulders but
you're responsible for my present dilemma."

"My dear child, you don't tell me! Then you must let me help you
out of it. But first tell me--what I'm responsible for."

"You married me to Peter Cheever."

"Why, yes, I believe I did. I marry so many dear girls. Yes, I
remember your wedding perfectly. A very pretty occasion, and you
looked extremely well. So did the bridegroom. I was quite proud
of joining two such--such--"

"Please unjoin us."

"Great Heavens, my child! What are you saying?"

"I am asking you to untie the knot you tied."

The old man stared at her, took his glasses off, rubbed them, put them
on, and peered into her face to make sure of her. Then he said:

"If that were in my power--and you know perfectly well that it is
not--it would be a violation of all that I hold sacred in matrimony."

"Just what do you hold sacred, Doctor Mosely?"

"Dear, dear, this will never do. Really, I don't wish to take
advantage of my cloth, but, really, you know, Charity, you have
been taught better than to snap at the clergy like that."

"Forgive me; I'm excited, not irreverent. But--well, you don't
believe in divorce, do you?"

"I have stated so with all the power of my poor eloquence."

"Do you believe that the seventh commandment is the least important
of the lot?"

"Certainly not!"

"If a man breaks any commandment he ought to do what he can to
remedy the evil?"

"Yes."

"Then if a man violates the seventh, why shouldn't he be compelled
to make restitution, too?"

"What restitution could he make?"

"Not much. He has taken from the girl he marries her name, her
innocence, her youth--he can restore only one thing--her freedom."

"That is not for him to restore. 'What, therefore, God hath joined,
let not man put asunder.'"

The old man grew majestic when he thundered the sonorities of Holy
Writ. Charity was cowed, but she made a craven protest:

"But who is to say what God hath joined?"

"The marriage sacraments administered by the ordained clergy
established that. There is every warrant for clergymen to perform
marriages; no Christian clergyman pretends to undo them."

"You believe that marriage is an indissoluble sacrament, then?"

"Indeed I do."

"Who made my marriage a sacrament?"

"I did, as the agent of God."

"And the minute you pronounce a couple married they are registered
in heaven, and God completes the union?"

"You may put it as you please; the truth is divine."

"In other words, a man like you can pronounce two people man and
wife, but once the words have escaped his lips nothing can ever
correct the mistake."

"There are certain conditions which annul a marriage, but once it
is genuinely ratified on earth it is ratified in heaven."

"In heaven, where, as the New Testament says in several places,
married people do not live together? The woman who had seven
husbands on earth, you know, didn't have any at all in heaven."

"So Christ answered the Sadducee who tempted him with questions."

"Marriage is strictly a matter of the earth, earthy, then?"

"Nothing is strictly that, my child. But what in the name of either
earth or heaven has led you to come over here and break into my
morning's work with such a fusillade of childish questions? You know
a child can ask questions that a wise man cannot answer. Also, a
child can ask questions which a wise man can answer to another wise
man but not to a child. You talk like an excited, an unreasoning
girl. I am surprised to hear you ridiculing the institution of
Christian marriage, but your ridicule does not prove it to be
ridiculous."

"Oh, it's not ridiculous to me, Doctor Mosely; and I'm not
ridiculing it. I am horribly afraid of what it has done to me
and will do to me."

"Explain that, my dear."

She did explain with all bluntness: "My husband openly lives with
a mistress. He prefers her to me."

The old man was stunned. He faltered: "Dear me!"

That is most reprehensible--most! He should be subjected to
discipline."

"Whose? He isn't a member of your church. And how can you discipline
such a man--especially as you don't believe in divorce?"

"Have you tried to win him back to the path of duty, to waken him
to a realizing sense of his obliquity?"

"Often and long. It can't be done, for he loves the other woman."

"Don't use the beautiful word love for such a debasing impulse."

"But I know he loves her!"

"How could you know?"

"I heard him tell her."

"You heard him! Do you ask me to believe that he told her that in
your presence?"

"I heard him on the dictagraph."

"You have been collecting evidence for divorce, then?"

"No, I was collecting it to assure myself that the gossip I had
heard was false--and to submit to you."

"But why to me?"

"When I first learned of this hideous situation my first impulse was
to rush to the courts. I went to church instead. I heard your sermon.
It stopped me from seeing a lawyer."

"I am glad my poor words have served some useful end."

"But have they?"

"If I have prevented one divorce I have not lived in vain."

"You don't think I have a right to ask for one?"

"Absolutely and most emphatically not."

"In spite of anything he may do?"

"Anything! He will come back to you, Charity. Possess your soul
in patience. It may be years, but keep the light burning and he
will return."

"In what condition?"

"My child, you shock me! You've been reading the horrible literature
that gets printed under the guise of science."

"I must wait, then?"

"Yes, if you wish to separate from him for a time, your absence might
waken him to a realizing sense. There are no children, I believe."

"None, yet."

"Yet? Oh, then--"

"If there were, would it make a difference?"

"Of course! an infinite difference!"

"You think a man and woman ought to let their child keep them
together in any event?"

"Need I say it? What greater bond of union could there be? Is it
not God's own seal and blessing on the wedlock, rendering it, so
to speak, even more indissoluble? You blush, my child. Is it true,
then, that--"

"A child is expected."

"Ah, my dear girl! How that proves what I have maintained! The birth
of the little one will bring the errant father to his senses. The
tiny hands will unite its parents as if they were the hands of a
priest drawing them together. That child is the divine messenger
confirming the sacrament."

"You believe that?"

"Utterly. Oh, I am glad. Motherhood is the crowning triumph; it
hallows any woman howsoever lowly or wicked. And you are neither,
Charity. I know you to be good and busy in good works. But were you
never so evil, this heavenly privilege would make of you a very
vessel of sanctity."

Charity turned pale as she sprung the trap. "The child is
expected--not by me, but by the other woman."

Doctor Mosely's beatitude turned to a sick disgust. Red and white
streaked his face. His first definite reaction was wrath at the
trick that had been played upon him.

"Mrs. Cheever! This is unworthy of you! You distress me! Really!"

"I was a little distressed myself. What am I to do?"

"I will not believe what you say."

"I heard her confess it--boast of it. She agrees with you that
the tiny hands will bring her and the father together and confirm
the sacrament."

"It can't be. It must not be!"

"You don't advocate that form of birth-control? They are arresting
people who preach prevention of conception. You are not so modern
as that."

"Hush!"

"What am I to do? You advise me to possess my soul in patience for
years. But the child won't wait that long. Doesn't the situation
alter your opinion of divorce?"

"No!"

"But if I don't divorce Mr. Cheever and let him marry her the child
will have no father--legally."

"The responsibility is his, not yours."

"You don't believe in infant damnation, do you? At least not on
earth, do you?"

"I cannot control the evil impulses of others. The doctrines of the
Church cannot be modified for the convenience of every sinner."

"You advise against divorce, then?"

"I am unalterably opposed to it."

"What is your solution, then, of this situation?"

"I shall have to think it over--and pray. Please go. You have
staggered me."

"When you have thought it over will you give me the help of your
advice?"

"Certainly."

"Then shall I wait till I hear from you?"

"If you will."

"Good-by, Doctor Mosely."

"Good-by, Mrs.--Charity--my child!"

He pressed her long hand in his old palms. He was trembling. He was
like a priest at bay before the altar while the arrows of the infidel
rain upon him. These arrows were soft as rain and keen as silk. He
was more afraid of them than if they had been tipped with flint or
steel.

Charity left the parsonage no wiser than she entered it. She had
accomplished nothing further than to ruin Doctor Mosely's excellent
start on an optimistic discourse in the prevailing fashion of the
enormously popular "Pollyanna" stories: it was to be a "glad" sermon,
an inexorably glad sermon. But poor Doctor Mosely could not preach
it now in the face of this ugly fact.

Charity went home with her miserable triumph, which only emphasized
her defeat.

She found at home a mass of details pressing for immediate action
if the big moving-picture project were not to lapse into inanity.
The mere toil of such a task ought to have been welcomed, at least
as a diversion. But her heart was as if dead in her.

She wondered how Jim Dyckman was progressing with his portion of
the task. He had not reported to her. She wondered why.

She decided to telephone him. She put out her hand, but did not lift
the receiver from the hook. She began to muse upon Jim Dyckman. She
began to think strange thoughts of him. If she had married him she
might not have failed so wretchedly to find happiness. Of course,
she might have failed more wretchedly and more speedily, but the
wayfarer who chooses one of two crossroads and meets a wolf upon
it does not believe that a lion was waiting on the other.




CHAPTER XXIII

Charity pondered her whole history with Jim Dyckman, from their
childhood flirtations on. He had had other flings, and she had flung
herself into Peter Cheever's arms. Peter Cheever had flung her out
again. Jim Dyckman had opened his arms again.

He had told her that she was wasting herself. He had offered her love
and devotion. She had struck his hands away and rebuked him fiercely.
A little later she had felt a pang of jealousy because he looked at
that little Greek dancer so interestedly. She had tried to atone for
this appalling thought by interesting herself in the little dancer's
welfare and hunting a position for her with the moving-picture
company. She had told Jim Dyckman to look for the girl in the studio
and find how she was getting along. He had never reported on that,
either. Charity smiled bitterly.

Last night it had come over her that her love for Peter Cheever
was dead. Was love itself, then, dead for her? or was her heart
already busy down there in the dark of her bosom, busy like a seed
germinating some new lily or fennel to thrust up into the daylight?

The sublime and the ridiculous are as close together as the opposite
sides of a sheet of cloth. The sublime is the obverse of the tapestry
with the figures heroic, saintly or sensuous, in battle or temple or
bower, in conquest, love, martyrdom, adoration. The reverse of the
tapestry is a matter of knots and tufts, broken patterns, ludicrous
accidents of contour. The same threads make up both sides.

On one side of Charity's tapestry she saw herself as a pitiful
figure, a neglected wife returned from errands of mercy to find her
husband enamoured of a wanton. She spurned the proffered heart of
a great knight while her own heart bled openly in her breast.

On the other side she saw the same red threads that crimsoned her
heart running across the arras to and from the heart of Jim Dyckman.
It was the red thread of life and love, blood-color--blood-maker,
blood-spiller, heart-quickener, heart-sickener, the red thread of
romance, of motherhood and of lust, birth and murder, family and
bawdry.

In the tapestry her heart was entire, her eyes upon her faithless
husband. On the other side her eyes faced the other knight; her
heartstrings ran out to his. She laughed harshly at the vision.
Her laugh ended in a fierce contempt of herself and of every body
and thing else in the world.

She was too weak to fight the law and the Church and the public
in order to divorce her husband. Would it be weakness or strength
to sit at home in the ashes and deny herself to life and love? She
could always go to Jim Dyckman and take him as her cavalier. But
then she would become one of those heartbroken, leash-broken women
who are the Maenads of society, more or less circumspect and shy, but
none the less lawless. But wherein were they better than the Zadas?

Charity was wrung with a nausea of love in all its activities; she
forswore them. Yet she was human. She was begotten and conceived in
the flesh of lovers. She was made for love and its immemorial usages.
How could she expect to destroy her own primeval impulse just because
one treacherous man had enjoyed her awhile and passed on to his next
affair?

There was no child of hers to grow up and replace her in the eternal
armies of love and compel her aside among the veteran women who have
been mustered out. She was in a sense already widowed of her husband.
Certainly she would never love Cheever again or receive him into her
arms. He belonged to the mother of his child. Let that woman step
aside into the benches of the spectators, those who have served their
purpose and must become wet-nurses, child-dryers, infant-teachers,
perambulator-motors, question-answerers, nose-blowers,
mischief-punishers, cradleside-bards.

Charity laughed derisively at the vision of Zada as a mother. The
Madonna pose had fascinated this Magdalen, but she would find that
mothers have many, many other things to do for their infants than
to sit for portraits and give them picturesque nourishment--many,
many other things. If Zada's child inherited its father's and
mother's wantonness, laziness, wickedness, and violence of temper,
there was going to be a lively nursery in that apartment.

Zada had so wanted a baby as a reward of love that she was willing
to snatch it out of the vast waiting-room without pausing for a
license. She would find that she had bought punishment at a high
price. The poor baby was in for a hard life, but it would give its
parents one in exchange.

Charity was appalled at this unknown harshness of her soul; it
sneered at all things once held beautiful and sacred. Her soul was
like a big cathedral broken into by a pagan mob that ran about
smashing images, defiling fonts, burlesquing all the solemn rituals.
Her quiet mind was full of sunburnt nymphs and goatish fauns with
shaggy fetlocks. She saw the world as a Brocken and all the Sabbath
there was was a Sabbath orgy of despicably brutish fiends.

She tried to run away. She went to her piano; her fingers would play
no dirges; they grew flippant, profane in rhythm. She could think of
no tunes but dances--andantes turned scherzi, the Handelian largo
became a Castilian tango. She found herself playing a something
strange--she realized that it was a lullaby! She fled from the piano.

She went to her books for nepenthe. There were romances in French,
Italian, German, English, and American, new books, old books, all
repeating the same stencils of passion in different colors. She
could have spat at them and their silly ardors over the same old
banality: I love him; he loves me--beatitude! I love him; he loves
her--tragedy!

The novelists were like stupid children parroting the ancient
monotony--_amo_, _amas_, _amat_; _amamus_,
_amatis_, _amant_; _amo_, _amas_,
_amat_--away with such primer stuff! She had learned the
grammar of love and was graduated from the school-books. She was
a postgraduate of love and wedlock. She had had enough of them--too
much; she would read no more of love, dwell no more upon it; she
would forget it.

She wanted some antiseptic book, something frigid, intellectual,
ascetic. At last she thought she had it. On her shelf she found
an uncut volume, a present from some one who had never read it,
but had bought it because it cost several dollars and would serve
as a gift.

It was Gardner's biography of Saint Catherine of Siena, "a study
in the religion, literature, and history of the fourteenth century
of Italy." That sounded heartless enough. The frontispiece portrait
of the wan, meager, despondent saint promised freedom from romantic
balderdash.

Charity found a chair by a window and began to read. The preface
announced the book to be "history centered in the work and
personality of one of the most wonderful women that ever lived."
This was the medicine Charity wanted--the story of a woman who
had been wonderful without love or marriage.

There followed a description of the evil times--and the wicked
town in which Caterina Benincasa was born--as long ago as 1347. A
pestilence swept away four-fifths of the populace. One man told how
he had buried five of his sons in one trench. People said that the
end of the world had come.

The word _trench_, the perishing of the people and the apparent
end of the world, gave the story a modern sound. It might concern
the murderous years of 1914-16.

Catherine was religious, as little girls are apt to be. She even
wanted to enter a monastery in the disguise of a boy. Later her
sister persuaded her to dye her hair and dress fashionably. Charity
began to fear for her saint, but was reassured to find that already
at sixteen she was a nun and had commenced that "life of almost
incredible austerity," freeing herself from all dependence on food
and sleep and resting on a bare board.

Charity read with envy how Catherine had devoted herself for three
whole years to silence broken only by confessions. How good it would
be not to talk to anybody about anything for years and years! How
blissful to live a calm, gray life in a strait cell, doing no labor
but the errands of mercy and of prayer!

Charity read on, wondering a little at Catherine's idea of God,
and her morbid devotion to His blood as the essence of everything
beautiful and holy. Charity could not put herself back into
that Middle Age when the most concrete materialism was mingled
inextricably with the most fantastic symbolism.

Suddenly she was startled to find that appalling temptations found
even Catherine out even in her cloistral solitude. It frightened
Charity to read such a passage as this:

There came a time, towards the end of these three years, when these
assaults and temptations became horrible and unbearable. Aerial men
and women, with obscene words and still more obscene gestures, seemed
to invade her little cell, sweeping round her like the souls of the
damned in Dante's "Hell," inviting her simple and chaste soul to
the banquet of lust. Their suggestions grew so hideous and persistent
that she fled in terror from the cell that had become like a circle
of the infernal regions, and took refuge in the church; but they
pursued her thither, though there their power seemed checked. And her
Christ seemed far from her. At last she cried out, remembering the
words in the vision: "I have chosen suffering for my consolation,
and will gladly bear these and all other torments, in the name of
the Saviour, for as long as shall please His Majesty." When she said
this, immediately all that assemblage of demons departed in confusion,
and a great light from above appeared that illumined all the room,
and in the light the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, nailed to the Cross
and stained with blood, as He was when by His own blood He entered
into the holy place; and from the Cross He called the holy virgin,
saying: "My daughter Catherine, seest thou how much I have suffered
for thee? Let it not then be hard to thee to endure for Me."

This terrified Charity, and the further she read the less comfort she
gained. Her matter-of-fact Manhattan mind could vaguely understand
Saint Catherine's mystic nuptials with Christ; but that definite gold
ring He placed on her finger, that diamond with four pearls around
it, frustrated her comprehension.

When she read on and learned how Catherine's utter self-denial
offended the other churchmen and church-women; how her confessions
of sinful thought brought accusations of sinful deed; how the friars
actually threw her out of a church at noon and kicked her as she lay
senseless in the dust; how she was threatened with assassination and
was turned from the doors of the people; and in what torment she died
--from these strange events in the progress of a strange soul through
a strange world Charity found no parallel to guide her life along.

For hours she read; but all that remained to her was the vision of
that poor woman who could find no refuge from her flesh and from
the demons that played evil rhapsodies upon the harp-strings of
her nerves.

Charity closed the book and understood fear. She was now not so much
sick of love as afraid of it. She was afraid of solitude, afraid of
religion and of the good works that cause ridicule or resentment.

Darkness gathered about her with the closing of the day. She dreaded
the night and the day, people and the absence of people. She knew no
woman she could take her anguish to for sympathy; it would provoke
only rebuke or laughter. The Church had rebuffed her. There remained
only men, and what could she hope from them? Even Jim Dyckman had not
been a friend merely. He had told her that she wasted herself as well
as him.

Beyond this night there were years of nights, years on years of days.
She could not even be alone; for who was ever actually alone? Even in
the hush and the gloom of the deepening twilight there were figures
here, shadows that sighed, delicate insinuators. There were no satyrs
or bassarids, but gentlemen in polo garb, in evening dress, in
yachting flannels. There were moon-nights in Florida, electric floods
on dancing-floors, this dim corner of this room with some one leaning
on her chair, bending his head and whispering:

"Charity, it's Jim. I love you."

She rose and thrust aside the arms that were not there. She could not
order him away, because he was not there. And yet he was there.

She was afraid that he still loved her and afraid that he did not.
She was afraid that she had always loved him and that she never
could. She was afraid that she would go to him or send for him,
and afraid that she would be afraid to. She thrust away the phantom,
but her palms pleaded against his departure. Softer than a whisper
and noisier than a cry was her thought:

"I don't want to be alone, I am afraid to be alone."




CHAPTER XXIV

Kedzie wanted to be a lady, and with the ladies stand--a tall tiara
in her hair, a lorgnette in her hand.

She had succeeded dizzily, tremendously, in her cinema career. The
timid thing that had watched the moving-picture director to see how
he held his wineglass, and accepted his smile as a beam of sunshine
breaking through the clouds about his godlike head, now found his
gracefulness "actory," his intimacy impudent, and his association
compromising. Ferriday's very picturesqueness and artistry convinced
her now that he was not quite the gentleman.

Kedzie was beginning to imitate the upper dialect already. She who
but a twelvemonth past was dividing people into "hicks" and "swells,"
and whose epithets were "reub" and "classy," was now a generation
advanced.

Ferriday saw it and raged. One day in discussing the cast of a
picture he mentioned the screen-pet Lorraine Melnotte as the man
for the principal male role.

Kedzie sighed; "Oh, he is so hopelessly romantic, never quite the
gentleman. In costume he gets by, but in evening clothes he always
suggests the handsome waiter--don't you think?"

Ferriday roared, with disgust: "Good Lord, but you're growing. What
is this thing I've invented? Are you a _Frankenstein?_"

Kedzie looked blank and sneered, "Are you implying that I have
Yiddish blood in me?"

She wondered why he laughed, but she would not ask. Along many lines
Kedzie did not know much, but in others she was uncannily acute.

Kedzie was gleaning all her ideas of gentlemanship from Jim Dyckman.
She knew that he had lineage and heritage and equipage and all that
sort of thing, and he must be great because he knew great people.
His careless simplicity, artlessness, shyness, all the things that
distressed her at first, were now accepted as the standards of
conduct for everybody.

In life as in other arts, the best artists grow from the complex to
the simple, the tortuous to the direct, from pose to poise, from
tradition to truth, from artifice to reality. Kedzie was beginning
to understand this and to ape what she could not do naturally.

Her comet-like scoot from obscurity to fame in the motion-picture sky
had exhausted the excitement of that sky, and now she was ashamed of
being a wage-earner, a mere actress, especially a movie actress.

If the studio had not caught fire and burned up so many thousands of
yards of her portraiture she would have broken her contract without
scruple. But the shock of the loss of her pretty images drove her
back to the scene. The pity of so much thought, emotion, action,
going up in smoke was too cruel to endure.

It was not necessary for Dyckman to pay the expenses of their
repetition in celluloid, as he offered. The Hyperfilm Company rented
another studio and began to remake the destroyed pictures. They were
speedily renewed because the scenarios had been rescued and there was
little of that appalling waste of time, money, and effort which has
almost wrecked the whole industry. They did not photograph a thousand
feet for every two hundred used.

Kedzie's first pictures had gone to the exchanges before the fire,
and they were continuing their travels about the world while she was
at work revamping the rest.

About this time the Hyperfilm managers decided to move their factory
to California, where the sempiternal sunlight insured better
photography at far less expense. This meant that Kedzie must leave
New York only partly conquered and must tear herself away from Jim
Dyckman.

She broke down and cried when she told Dyckman of this, and for the
first time his sympathies were stampeded on her account. He petted
her, and she slid into his arms with a child-like ingratiation that
made his heart swell with pity.

"What's the odds," he said, attempting consolation, "where you work,
so long as you work?"

"But it would mean," she sobbed--"it would mean taking me away-ay
from you-ou."

This tribute enraptured Dyckman incredibly. That he should mean so
much to so wonderful a thing as she was was unbelievably flattering.
He had dogged Charity's heels with meek and unrewarded loyalty until
he had lost all pride. Kedzie's tears at the thought of leaving him
woke it to life again.

"By golly, you sha'n't go, then!" he cried. "I was thinking of coming
out there to visit you, but--but it would be better yet for you to
stay right here in little old New York."

This brought back Kedzie's smile. But she faltered, "What if they
hold me to my contract, though?"

"Then we'll bust the old contract. I'll buy 'em off. You needn't
work for anybody."

There was enough of the old-fashioned woman of one sort left in
Kedzie to relish the slave-block glory of being fought over by two
purchasers. She spoke rather slyly:

"But I'll be without wages then. How would I live? I've got
to work."

Dyckman answered at once: "Of course not. I'll take care of you.
I offered to before, you know." He had made a proposal of marriage
some time before; it was the only sort of proposal that he had been
tempted to make to Kedzie. He liked her immensely; she fascinated
him; he loved to pet her and kiss her and talk baby talk to her; but
she had never inflamed his emotions.

Either it was the same with her, or she had purposely controlled
herself and him from policy, or had been restrained by coldness or
by a certain decency, of which she had a good deal, after all and
in spite of all.

Throughout their relations they had deceived Ferriday and other
cynics. For all their indifference to appearances, they had behaved
like a well-behaved pair of young betrothed Americans, with a
complete freedom from chaperonage, and a considerable liberality
of endearments, but no serious misdemeanor.

Kedzie knew what he meant, but she wanted to hear him propose again.
So she murmured:

"How do you mean, take care of me?"

"I mean--marry you, of course."

"Oh!" said Kedzie. And in a whirlwind of pride she twined her arms
about his neck and clung to him with a desperate ardor.

Dyckman said: "This isn't my first proposal, you know. You said you
wanted time to think it over. Haven't you thought it over yet?"

"Yes," Kedzie sighed, but she said no more.

"Well, what's the answer?" he urged.

"Yes."

She whispered, torn between rapture and despair.

Any woman might have blazed with pride at being asked to marry Jim
Dyckman. The little villager was almost consumed like another Semele
scorched by Jupiter's rash approach.

In Dyckman's clasp Kedzie felt how lonely she had been. She wanted to
be gathered in from the dangers of the world, from poverty and from
work. She had not realized how tiny a thing she was, to be combating
the big city all alone, until some one offered her shelter.

People can usually be brave and grim in the presence of defeat and
peril and hostility. It is the kind word, the sudden victory, the
discovery of a friend that breaks one down. Even Kedzie wept.

She wept all over Jim Dyckman's waistcoat, sat on his lap and
swallowed throat-lumps and tears and tugged at his cuff-links with
her little fingers.

Then she looked up at him and blushed and kissed him fiercely,
hugging him with all the might of her arms. He was troubled by the
first frenzy she had ever shown for him, and he might have learned
how much more than a merely pretty child she was if she had not
suddenly felt an icy hand laid on her hands, unclasping them.

A cold arm seemed to bend about her throat and drag her back. She
slid from Dyckman's knees, gasping:

"Oh!"

She could not become Mrs. Jim Dyckman, because she was Mrs. Thomas
Gilfoyle.

Dyckman was astounded and frightened by her action. He put his hand
out, but she unclenched his fingers from her wrist, mumbling:

"Don't--please!"

"Why not? What's wrong with you, child?"

How could she tell him? What could she do? She must do a lot of
thinking. On one thing she was resolved: that she would not give
Dyckman up. She would find Gilfoyle and get quit of him. They had
been married so easily; there must be an easy way of unmarrying.

She studied Dyckman. She must not frighten him away, or let him
suspect. She laughed nervously and went back to his arms, giggling:

"Such a wonderful thing it is to have you want me for your wife!
I'm not worthy of your name, or your love, or anything."

Dyckman could hardly agree to this, whatever misgivings might be
shaking his heart. He praised her with the best adjectives in his
scant vocabulary and asked her when they should be wed.

"Oh, not for a long while yet," she pleaded.

"Why?" he wondered.

"Oh, because!" It sickened and alarmed her to put off the day, but
how could she name it?

When he left her at last the situation was still a bit hazy. He had
proposed and been accepted vaguely. But when he had gallantly asked
her to "say when" she had begged for time.

Dyckman, once outside the spell of Kedzie's eyes and her warmth, felt
more and more dubious. He was ashamed of himself for entertaining any
doubts of the perfection of his situation, but he was ashamed also of
his easy surrender. Here he was with his freedom gone. He had escaped
the marriage-net of so many women of so much brilliance and prestige,
and yet a little movie actress had landed him.

He compared Anita Adair with Charity Coe, and he had to admit that
his fiancee suffered woefully in every contrast. He could see the
look of amazement on Charity's face when she heard the news. She
would be completely polite about it, but she would be appalled. So
would his father and mother. They would fight him tremendously. His
friends would give him the laugh, the big ha-ha! They would say he
had made a fool of himself; he had been an easy mark for a little
outsider.

He wondered just how it had happened. The fact was that Kedzie had
appealed to his pity. That was what none of the other eligibles had
ever done, least of all Charity the ineligible.

He went home. He found his father and mother playing double Canfield
and wrangling over it as usual. They were disturbed by his manner.
He would not tell them what was the matter and left them to their
game. It interested them no more. It seemed so unimportant whether
the cards fell right or not. The points were not worth the excitement.
Their son was playing solitaire, and it was not coming out at all.
They discussed the possible reasons for his gloom. There were so
many.

"I wish he'd get married to some nice girl," sighed Mrs. Dyckman.
A mother is pretty desperate when she wants to surrender her son
to another woman.




CHAPTER XXV

Kedzie made a bad night of it. She hated her loneliness. She hated
her room. She hated her maid. She wanted to live in the Dyckman
palace and have a dozen maids and a pair of butlers to boss around,
and valets, and a crest on her paper, and invitations pouring in
from people whose pictures were in "the social world." She wanted
to snub somebody and show certain folks what was what.

The next morning she was sure of only one thing, and that was that
Dyckman had asked her to be his wife; and be his wife she would,
no matter what it cost.

She wondered how she could get rid of Gilfoyle, whom she looked upon
now as nothing less than an abductor. He was one of those "cadets"
the papers had been full of a few years before, who lured young
girls to ruin under the guise of false marriages and then sold them
as "white slaves."

Kedzle's wrath was at the fact that Gilfoyle was not legally an
abductor. She would have been glad merely to be ruined, and she
would have rejoiced at the possibility of a false marriage. In the
movies the second villain only pretended to be a preacher, and then
confessed his guilt. But such an easy solution was not for Kedzie.
New York City had licensed Gilfoyle's outrage; the clerk had sold
her to him for two dollars; the Municipal Building was the too, too
solid witness.

She felt a spiritual solace in the fact that she had not had a
religious marriage. The sacrament was only municipal and did not
count. Her wedding had lacked the blessing of the duly constituted
ministry; therefore it was sacrilegious; therefore it was her
conscientious duty to undo the pagan knot as quickly as possible.
She reverted to the good old way of the Middle Ages. There was
no curse of divorce then, and indeed there was small need of it,
since annulment could usually be managed on one religious ground
or another, or if not, people went about their business as if it
had been managed.

Kedzie felt absolved of any fault of selfishness now, and justified
in taking any steps necessary to the punishment of Gilfoyle.
_Religion_ is a large, loose word, and it can be made to fit
any motive; but once assumed it seems to strengthen every resolution,
to chloroform mercy and hallow any means to the self-sanctified end.
What people would shrink from as inhuman they constantly embrace
as divine.

Kedzie wondered how she could communicate with her adversary. She
might best go to Chicago and fight herself free there. There would
be less risk of Dyckman's hearing about it.

She shuddered at what she would have to tell him unless she kept the
divorce secret. He might not love her if he knew she was not the nice
new girl he thought her, but an old married woman. And what would he
say when he found that her real name was Mrs. Thomas Gilfoyle
_nee_ Kedzie Thropp?

But first Kedzie must divorce herself from the Hyperfilm Company.
She went to the studio with rage in her heart. She told Ferriday
that she would not go to California. He proposed that she break
with the Hyperfilm Company and form a corporation of her own with
Dyckman as angel.

Kedzie was wroth at this. From now on, spending Dyckman's money
would be like spending her own. Ferriday, once her accomplice in
the noble business of getting Dyckman to back her, was revealed
now as a cheap swindler trying to keep Mrs. Dyckman in trade at
her husband's expense.

"I'm through with the pictures, I tell you!" she stormed. "I'm sick
of the cheap notoriety. I'm tired of being public property. I can't
go out on the street without being pointed at. It's disgusting. I
don't want to be incorporated or photographed or interviewed. I want
to be let alone. I'm tired. I've worked too hard. I need a rest."

Ferriday hated her with great agility. He had been willing to abet
her breach of contract, provided she let him form a new company, but
if she would not that made a great difference. He reminded her:

"The Hyperfilm Company will hold you to your bond. They want your
hundred and twenty-five pounds of flesh. If you should break with
them they'd have a case against you for damages."

"How much?" said Kedzie, feeling like Mrs. Croesus.

Ferriday whistled and murmured: "Spoken like the wife of a
multimillionaire! So you've got him at last."

"To who," Kedzie began, with an owl-like effect that she corrected
with some confusion,"--to whom do you refer to?"

Ferriday grinned: "You're going to marry out of the movies, and
you're going to try to horn into sassiety. Well, I warned you before
that if you became Dyckman's wife you would find his world vastly
different from the ballroom and drawing-room stuff you pull off in
the studio--strangely and mysteriously different."

He frightened her. She was not sure of herself. She could not forget
Nimrim, Missouri, and her arrival at the edge of society _via_
the Bronx, the candy-shop, and the professional camera.

She felt that the world had not treated her squarely. Why should she
have to carry all this luggage of her past through the gate with her?
She wondered if it would not be better to linger in the studios till
she grew more famous and could bring a little prestige along.

But Ferriday was already ousting her even from that security.

"The managers of the Hyperfilm Company will think you have done them
dirt, but I'll explain that you are not really responsible. You've
seen a million dollars, and you're razzle-dazzled. They'll want a bit
of that million, I suppose, as liquidated damages, but I'll try to
keep them down."

Kedzie was at bay in her terror. She struck back.

"Tell 'em they won't get a cent if they try to play the hog."

"They don't have hogs on Fifth Avenue, Anita. Don't forget that.
Well, good-by and good luck."

This was more like an eviction than a desertion. Kedzie felt a
little softening of her heart toward the old homestead.

"I'm sure I'm much obliged for all you've done for me."

Ferriday roared his scorn.

She went on: "I am. Honest-ly! And I hope I haven't caused you too
much inconvenience."

Ferriday betrayed how much he was hurt by his violent efforts to
conceal it.

"Not at all. It happens that I've just found another little girl to
take your place. This one drifted in among the extras, just as you
did, and she's a dream. I'll show her to the managers, and they may
be so glad to get her they won't charge you a cent. In fact, if you
say the word, I might manage it so that they would pay you something
to cancel your contract."

This was quite too cruel. It crushed the tears out of Kedzie's eyes,
and she had no fight left in her. She simply stammered:

"No, thank you. Don't bother. Well, good-by."

"Good-by, Anita--good luck!"

He let her make her way out of his office alone. She had to skirt
the studio. From behind a canvas wall over which the Cooper-Hewitt
tubes rained a quivering blue glare came the words of the assistant
director:

"Now choke her, Hazlitt! Harder! Register despair, Miss Hardy. Try
to scream and can't! That's good. Now, Walsh, jump in to the rescue.
Slug him. Knock his bean off. 'S enough! Fall, Hazlitt. Now gather up
Miss Hardy, Walsh. Register devotion, gratitude, adoration--now you
got it. Turn on your lamps full power, dearie! Wow! Bully! A couple
of tears, please. That's the stuff. You'll be the queen of the world.
Weep a little more. Real tears. That's it! Now clinch for the
fade-out. Cut!"

Kedzie tiptoed away. She felt as Eve must have felt sneaking out of
Eden and hearing the nightingales wrangling and the leopards at play.




CHAPTER XXVI

We must fly fast and keep on flying if we would escape from our
pasts. Ambition, adventure, or sheer luck may carry us forward out
of them as in a cavalry-foray over strange frontiers, but sooner or
later we must wait for our wagons or fall back to them.

Kedzie's past was catching up with her. It is a glorious thing
when one's past comes up loaded with food, munitions, good deeds,
charities, mercies, valued friendships. But poor little Kedzie's
little past included one incompetent and unacknowledged husband
and two village parents.

Kedzie had concealed the existence of Gilfoyle from her new friends
as anxiously as if he had been a baby born out of wedlock instead of
a grown man born into it. And Gilfoyle had returned the compliment.
He had not told his new friends in Chicago that he was married,
because the Anita Adair that he had left in New York was, as F.P.A.
would say, his idea of nothing to brag about.

Gilfoyle had loved Kedzie once as a pretty photographer's model, and
had admired her as an exquisite dancing-creature who seemed to have
spun off at a tangent from the painted side of an old Greek amphora.
He had actually written poetry to her! And when a poet has done that
for a girl he feels that he has done more for her than she can ever
repay. Even if she gives him her mortal self, what is that to the
immortality he has given her?

When Kedzie telegraphed Gilfoyle that she had lost her job in Newport
and had arrived in New York lonely and afraid, had he not taken care
of her good name by giving her his own? Not to mention a small matter
of all his money!

She had repaid him with frantic discontent. The morning after the
wedding, was she not imitating the parrot's shrill ridicule of life
and love? Did she ridicule his poetry, or didn't she? She did.
Instead of being his nine Muses, she had become his three Furies.

When he lost his job and she went out to get one of her own, had she
succeeded in getting anything with dignity in it? No! She had become
an extra woman in a movie mob. That was a belittling thing to
remember. But worst of all, she had committed the unpardonable sin
for a woman--she had lent him money. He could never forgive or forget
the horrible fact that he had borrowed her last cash to pay his fare
to Chicago.

Next to that for inexcusableness was her self-support--and, worse,
self-sufficiency. Gilfoyle had sent Kedzie no money beyond returning
what he had borrowed, and she had not used that to buy a ticket to
Chicago with. She had written rarely, and had not asked him for money.
That was mighty convenient for him, but it was extremely suspicious,
and he cherished it as a further grudge.

He never found himself quite flush enough to force any money on her,
because he had found that it costs money to live in Chicago, too.
People in New York get the idea that it costs everything to live
in New York and nothing to live anywhere else--if it can be called
living.

Gilfoyle also discovered that his gifts were not appreciated in
Chicago as he had expected them to be. Chicago people seemed to
think it quite natural for New York to call for help from Chicago,
and successful Western men were constantly going East; but for
a New-Yorker to revert to Chicago looked queer. He appeared to
patronize, and yet he must have had some peculiar reason for giving
up New York.

All in all and by and large, Gilfoyle was not happy in Chicago. The
few persons, mainly women, who took him up as an interesting novelty
grew tired of him. His advertising schemes did not dazzle the alert
Illini. For one reason or another the wares he celebrated did not
"go big."

He lost his first job and took an inferior wage with a shabbier firm.
He took his women friends to the movies now instead of the theaters.
And so it was that one night when he was beauing a Denver woman, who
was on her way to New York and fame, he found the box-line extending
out on the sidewalk and half-way up the block. It was irksome to wait,
but people like to go to shows where the crowds are. He took his place
in the line, and his Miss Clampett stood at his elbow.

The queue was slowly drawn into the theater and he finally reached
a place in front of the lithographs. He almost jumped out of his
skin when he saw a colossal head of Anita Adair smiling at him from
a sunbonnet streaming with curls.

The letterpress informed Gilfoyle that it was indeed his own Anita.
The people in the line were talking of her as the new star. They were
calling her familiarly by her first name and discussing her with all
the freedom of the crowd:

"That's Anita. Ain't she sweet?"

"Everybody says Anita's just too lovely."

"Some queen, boy? Me for Anita. She can pack her clothes in my
trunk!"

Gilfoyle felt that he ought in common decency to knock down this
fellow who claimed the privileges belonging to himself. But he
remembered that he had abandoned those privileges. And the fellow
looked unrefinedly powerful.

Gilfoyle gnawed the lip of silence, realizing also that his
announcement would make a strange impression on Miss Clampett.
She was one of those authors one reads about who think it necessary
to hunt experiences and live romances in order to find literary
material.

Gilfoyle had done his best to teach her how wildly well a born
New-Yorker can play the lute of emotion. To proclaim now that he was
the anonymous husband of this glitterer on the billboard would have
been a shocking confession.

Gilfoyle swallowed his secret, but it made his heart flutter
tremendously. When at length he and Miss Clampett were admitted to
the theater and walked down the aisle Kedzie came from the background
of the screen forward as if to meet him. She came on and on, and
finally as he reached his seat, a close-up of her brought them face
to face with a vividness that almost knocked him over. She looked
right at him, seemed to recognize him, and stopped short.

He felt as guilty as if she had actually caught him at a rendezvous.
Yet he felt pride, too.

This luminous being was his wife. He remembered all that she had been
to him. Miss Clampett noted his perturbations and made a brilliant
guess at their cause. She asked him if he wanted to leave her and go
around to the stage door to meet this wonderful Miss Adair. Gilfoyle
laughed poorly at her quip. He was surprised to learn from her that
Anita Adair was already a sensation among the film stars. He had not
chanced to read the pages where her press-matter had celebrated her.
He defended himself from the jealousy of Miss Clampett very lamely;
for the luscious beauty of his Anita, her graphic art, and her sway
over the audience rekindled his primal emotions to a greater fire
than ever.

When the show was over he abandoned Miss Clampett on her door-step
and went to his own boarding-house in a nympholepsy. He was a mortal
wedded to a fairy. He was Endymion with a moon enamoured of him.
Kedzie indeed had come down from the screen to Gilfoyle, clothed
in an unearthly effulgence.

The next morning he turned to the moving-picture columns of the
Chicago _Tribune_, the _Herald_, and the other papers, and
he found that Kedzie was celebrated there with enthusiasm by Kitty
Kelly, "Mae Tinee," Mrs. Parsons, and the rest of the critics of
the new art. On Sunday several of her interviews appeared, and her
portraits, in eminent company.

Gilfoyle's forgotten affections came back to life, expanding and
efflorescent. He throbbed with the wonder of it. The moving picture
had brought romance again to earth.

Thousands of men all over the country were falling in love with
Kedzie. Who had a better right to than her husband? Unconsciously
his resentments against her fell away. His heart swelled with such
plenitude of forgiveness that he might in time have overlooked
the money she lent him. It was not a disgrace to accept money from
a genius of her candle-power.

For a long while he had been afraid that she would telegraph him
for funds, or descend on him in Chicago and bring a heavy baggage of
necessities. Now he was no longer afraid of that. He was afraid that
if he called on her in New York she might not remember him.

He had heard of the real and the alleged salaries of moving-picture
stars, and he assumed that Kedzie must be as well paid as she was
well advertised. He did not know of the measly little hundred dollars
a week she was bound down to by her contract. If he had known he would
have rejoiced, because one hundred dollars a week was about four times
more than Gilfoyle had ever earned.

Of course Gilfoyle resolved to go to New York. Of course he started
to telegraph his wife and found the telegram hard to write. Then he
began a long letter and found it harder to write. And of course he
finally decided to surprise her. He resigned his job. His resignation
was accepted with humiliating cordiality.

Of course he took the Twentieth Century Limited to New York. It was
more expensive, but it was quicker; and what did a few dollars matter,
now that he was the husband of such an earner? He had unwittingly
hitched his wagon to a star, and now he would take a ride through
heaven. He wrote a poem or two to that effect, and the train-wheels
inspired his prosody.

He dreamed of an ideal life in which he should loll upon a sofa of
ease, thrumming his lyre, while his wife devoted herself to her
career outside.

Where would Horace and Virgil have been if they had not had their
expenses paid by old Mr. Maecenas? Since Mrs. Gilfoyle could afford
to be a patroness, let her patronage begin at home. Her reward would
be beyond price, for Gilfoyle decided to perpetuate her fame in
powerful rhyme far outlasting the celluloid in which she was writing
her name now.

Celluloid is perishable indeed, and very inflammable. Gilfoyle did
not know that the Hyperfilm studio had burned to the ground before
he saw Kedzie's picture in Chicago. But he blithely left that city
to its fate and sped eastward.




CHAPTER XXVII

Gilfoyle reached New York on the Twentieth Century. It was an hour
late, and so the railroad company paid him a dollar. He wished it
had been later. In his present plight time was anything but money
to him.

It took him some time to find the Hyperfilm Company's temporary
studio. He learned of the fire, and his hope wavered. When he reached
the studio Kedzie was not there. The news of her resignation had
percolated even to the doorman, who rarely knew anything from inside
or outside the studio--an excellent non-conductor of information he
was. Gilfoyle had some difficulty in finding Kedzie's address, but
at last he learned it, and he made haste to her apartment.

He was impressed by its gaudy vestibule. He told the hall-boy that
he wanted to see Miss Adair.

"Name, please?"

"Just say a gentleman to see her."

"Gotta git the name, or I can't 'phome up. Miss Adair naturally
won't see no gempman ain't got a name."

"Does she see many men?" Gilfoyle asked, with sudden alarm.

"Oh, nossa. Mainly Mr. Dyckman. But that's her business."

"What Dyckman is that, the rich Jim Dyckman?"

"Well, I ain't s'posed to give out info'mation."

"Are you supposed to take in money?" Gilfoyle juggled with
a half-dollar.

The hall-boy juggled his eyes in unison, and laughed yearningly:
"I reckon I might let you up by mistake. Does you know Miss Adair
right well?"

"Very well--I'm a relative of hers by marriage. I want to surprise
her."

"Oh, well, you better go on up."

Gilfoyle applied the magic silver wafer to the itching palm and
stepped into the elevator when it came.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Kedzie was alone. She had sent her maid out to get some headache
powders. She had had a good cry when she reached home. She had
pondered her little brain into a kink, trying to figure out her
campaign. When she had a headache, or a cold, or a sleepless night,
or a lethargy, she always put a powder in her stomach. It never did
any good, and she was always changing the nostrum, but she never
changed the idea.

She felt ill and took off her street suit and her corsets, put on
a soft, veilly thing, and stretched out on her long-chair.

She was coddling a photograph of Jim Dyckman. He had scrawled across
it, "To Little Anita from Big Jim." She kissed the picture and
cherished it to her aching breast.

The door-bell rang. She supposed that, as usual, the maid had
forgotten to take her key with her. She went into the hall in a
rage, still holding the photograph. She flung the door open--and
in walked Gilfoyle.

She fell back stupefied. He grinned, and took her in with devouring
eyes. If he had no right to devour her, who had? He approved of her
with a rush of delight:

"Well, Anita, here I am. And how's the little wife?"

She could not answer him. He stared ferociously, and gasped as if
he had forgotten how she had looked:

"Golly, but you're beautiful? Where's the little kiss?"

He threw his arms about her, garnering in the full sheaf of her
beauty. She tried to escape, to protest, but he smothered her with
his lips. She had been so long away from him, she had so long omitted
him from her plans, that she felt a sense of outrage in his assault.
Something virginal had resumed her heart, and his proprietorship
revolted her.

Her shoulders were so constrained that she could not push free. She
could only raise her right hand outside his left arm, and reaching
his face, thrust it away. Her nails were long and sharp. They tore
deep gashes in his cheeks and across his nose.

He let her go with a yelp of pain and shame. His fists gathered;
primeval instinct told him to smash the mask of pale hatred he saw
before him. But he saw the photograph in her left hand. It had been
bent double in the scuffle. He snatched at it and tore away the
lower half. He read the inscription with disgust and growled:

"That's the reason you didn't write me! That's why you don't want
to see me, eh? So he's keeping you! And that's why you resigned
from the studio!"

The atrocity of this slander was too much. With a little cat-like
yowl she went for him, dropping the broken photograph and spreading
all ten claws.

He caught her arms and held them apart where she could scratch
nothing more than his wrists, which she did venomously. The cat
tribe is a bad tribe to fight at close quarters. One must kill or
break loose.

When Kedzie tried to bite him, Gilfoyle realized that she was in no
mood for argument. He dragged her to the living-room door and then
flung her as far as he could from him. She toppled over into a chair
and began to cry.

It was not a pretty scene. Gilfoyle took out his handkerchief and
pressed it to his face and the bridge of his nose. Then he looked
at the red marks and held them out for her to observe:

"See what you did to me!"

"I'm glad of it," she snapped. "I wish I'd torn your eyes out."

This alone would not necessarily have proved that she did not love
him devotedly, but in this case it corroborated a context of hatred.
Gilfoyle felt rebuffed. There was a distinct lack of hospitality in
her welcome. This reception was the very opposite of his imagined
rencounter.

He did what a man usually does, revealing a masculine inability
to argue with a woman. He told her all her faults of omission and
commission as if that would bring her to a reconciliating humor.
She listened awhile, and then answered, with a perfect logic that
baffled him:

"All you say only goes to show that you don't love me. You never did.
You went away and left me. I might have starved, for all you cared.
But I've worked like a dog, and now that I've had a little success
you come back and say: 'How's the little wife? Where's the little
kiss?' Agh! And you dare to kiss me! And then you slander me. You
don't give me credit for these plain little rooms that I rent with
my own hard-earned money. You couldn't imagine me living in a place
like this unless some man paid for it. Heaven knows I'd have lived
with you long enough before I ever had a decent home. Humph! Well,
I guess so! Humph!"

Gilfoyle mopped his face again and looked at his handkerchief. One's
own blood is very interesting. The sight of his wounds did not touch
Kedzie's heart. She could never feel sorry for anybody she was
mad at.

Gilfoyle's wits were scattered. He mumbled, futilely, "Well, if
that's the way you feel about it!"

"That's the way I feel about it!" Kedzie raged on. "I suppose you've
had so many affairs of your own out there that you can't imagine
anybody else being respectable, can you?"

Gilfoyle had not come East to publish his autobiography. He thought
that a gesture of misunderstood despair would be the most effective
evasion. So he made it, and turned away. He put his handkerchief to
his nose and looked at it. He turned back.

"Would you mind if I went into your bathroom to wash my face?"

"I certainly would. Where do you think you are? You get on out before
my maid comes back. I don't want her to think I receive men alone!"

Her heart was cold as a toad in her breast, and she loathed his
presence. He repeated his excellent gesture of despair, sighed,
"All right," and left the room. The two pieces of Jim Dyckman's
photograph were still on the floor of the hall. He stooped quickly
and silently and picked them up as he went out. He closed the door
with all the elegy one can put in a door with a snap-lock.

He was about to press the elevator button, but he did not like to
present himself gory to the elevator-boy. He walked down the marble
and iron steps zigzagging around the elevator shaft.

He paused on various landings to think and mop. He looked at the
photograph of Dyckman, and his heart spoiled in him. He recalled
his wife's anxiety lest her maid should find a man there. He recalled
the hall-boy's statement that Mr. Dyckman was often there. His wife
was lying to him, plainly.

He had known detectives and newspaper men and had heard them speak of
what a friend they had in the usual hall-boy. He thought that he had
here the makings of a very pretty little bit of detectivity.

He reached the main floor, but made a hasty crossing of the gaudy
vestibule without stopping to speak to the hall-boy. He had left his
baggage at the station, expecting to send it to his wife's apartment
when he found it. He had found it, but he could imagine what would
happen to the baggage if he sent it there.

"All right!" he said to himself. "If it's war she wants, cry havoc
and let slip the sleuth hounds."

He went to a drug-store and had his wounds sterilized and plastered,
saying that a pet cat had scratched him.

"Just so," said the drug clerk, with a grin. "Pet cats are very
dangerous."

Gilfoyle wanted to slug him, but he wanted his wounds dressed more.
He walked and walked down the back avenues till he reached his old
boarding-house district near Greenwich Village. He found a landlady
who had trusted him often and been paid eventually. He gave his
baggage checks to an expressman and went into retirement for
meditation.

When his suit-case arrived he got out the poems he had been writing
to Anita. He clenched them for destruction, but an exquisite line
caught his eye. Why should his art suffer because of a woman's
perfidy? He had intended to sonnetize Anita into perenniality.
She had played him false. Just for that he would leave her mortal.
She should perish.

The poems would keep. He might find another and a worthier client
for posterity. Or he might put an imaginary name there, as other
poets had done. He wanted one that would slip into the poetry easily.
He could use "Pepita" without deranging the rhyme.

He glared at the picture of Dyckman. He knew the face well. He had
seen it in print numberless times. He had had the man pointed out
to him at races and horse-shows and polo-games and bazaars.

He struck the photograph in the face, realizing that he could not
have reached the face of the big athlete. He wondered why this fellow
should have been given such stature with such wealth. He was ghastly
rich, the snob, the useless cumberer of the ground!

All of Gilfoyle's pseudo-socialistic hostility to wealth and the
wealthy came to the aid of his jealousy. To despoil the man was a
duty. He had decoyed Anita from her duty by his millions. Not that
she was unwilling to be decoyed. And now she would revel in her
ill-got luxury, while her legal husband could starve in a garret.

As he brooded, the vision of Dyckman's money grew huger and huger.
The dog had not merely thousands or hundreds of thousands, but
thousands of thousands. Gilfoyle had never seen a thousand-dollar
bill. Yet Dyckman, he had heard, was worth twenty millions. If his
wealth were changed into thousand-dollar bills there would be twenty
thousand of them in a stack.

If Gilfoyle peeled off one thousand of those thousand-dollar bills
the stack would not be perceptibly diminished. If Gilfoyle could get
a million dollars from Dyckman, or any part of it, Dyckman would
never notice it; and yet it would mean a life of surety and poetry
and luxury for Gilfoyle.

If he caught Dyckman and Anita together in a compromising situation
he could collect heavily under threat of exposure. Rather than be
dragged into the newspapers and the open courts Dyckman would pay
almost any sum.

There was a law in New York against the violation of the seventh
commandment, and the penitentiary was the punishment. The law
had failed to catch its first victim, but it had been used in
Massachusetts with success. The threat against Dyckman would
surely work.

Then there was the recent Mann Law aimed at white-slavery but a more
effective weapon for blackmailers. If Gilfoyle could catch Dyckman
taking Anita motoring across the State line into New Jersey or
Connecticut he could arrest them or threaten them.

Also he could name Dyckman as co-respondent in a divorce suit--or
threaten to--and collect heavily that way. This was not blackmail
in Gilfoyle's eyes. He scorned such a crime. This was honorable and
necessary vindication of his offended dignity. There was probably
never a practiser of blackmail who did not find a better word for
the duress he applied.

Gilfoyle needed help. He had no cash to hire a detective with. But
he knew a detective or two who might go into the thing with him on
spec'.

Gilfoyle began to compose a scheme of poetic revenge. It should be
his palinode to Anita. He would keep her under surveillance, but he
would not let her know of his propinquity. A happy thought delighted
him. To throw her off her guard, he wrote and sent a little note:

DEAR ANITA,--Since you evidently don't love me any longer, I will not
bother you any more. I am taking the train back to Chicago. Address
me there care of General Delivery if you ever want to see me again.

YOUR ONCE LOVED HUSBAND.

He addressed it and gave it to the waitress to drop in the mail-box.
He had no money to squander on detectives, but he had a friend,
Connery, who as a reporter had achieved a few bits of sleuthing
in cases that had baffled the police. That evening Gilfoyle went
hunting for Connery.




CHAPTER XXIX

Kedzie simmered in her own wrath a long while before she realized
that she had let Gilfoyle escape. He was the very man she was looking
for, and she had planned to go even to Chicago to find him.

He had stumbled into her trap, and she had driven him out. She ran to
the window and stared up and down the street, but there was no trace
of him. She had no idea where he could have gone. She wrung her hands
and denounced herself for a fool.

She went to the hall to pick up the photograph of Jim Dyckman. Both
halves of it were gone. Now she was frightened. Gilfoyle had departed
meekly, but he had taken the picture; therefore he must have been
filled with hate. He had revenge in his mind. And she trembled at
her danger. He might strike at any time.

She suspected his exact intention. She dreaded to have Jim Dyckman
call on her. She had a wild notion of asking him to take her away
from New York--down to Atlantic City or up to the Berkshires--anywhere
to be rid of Gilfoyle without being left alone. If she had done this
she would have done just what Gilfoyle wanted her to, and the Mann
Act could have been wielded again as a blackjack.

Meanwhile Anita was afraid to have Dyckman come to her apartment
as he constantly did. She telephoned to him that she would be busy
at the studio all day. She would meet him at dinner somewhere. But
afterward she would come home alone on one pretext or another.

She carried out this plan--and spent a day of confused terror
and anger.

When Gilfoyle's letter arrived, saying that he was on his way to
Chicago, it gave her more delight than any other writing of his had
ever given her. She need not skulk any more. Her problem was as far
from solution as ever, but she wanted a respite from it, and she
gave herself up to a few days of rapture. She was free from her work
at the studio, and she was like a girl home from boarding-school on
a vacation.

Dyckman found her charming in this mood. She made a child of him,
and his years of dissatisfaction were forgotten. He romped through
the festivals of New York like a cub.

There was no discussion of any date of marriage, and he was glad
enough to let the matter drift. He did not want to marry Kedzie.
He was satisfied to have her as a playmate. He was afraid to think
of her as a wife, not only from fear of the public sensation it
would make, but from fear of her in his home. Young men also know
the timidities that are considered maidenly. He did not dream of
Kedzie's reason for postponing always the matter of a wedding date.

Kedzie had come to depend on Jim for her entertainment. He took
care of her evenings, gave them vivacity and opulence. He took her
to theaters, to the opera, the music-halls, the midnight roofs,
and other resorts for the postponement of sleep. Occasionally he
introduced her to friends of his whom they encountered. It pained
and angered him, and Kedzie, too, to note that the men were inclined
to eye Kedzie with tolerant amusement. There was a twinkle of
contempt in their smiling eyes that seemed to say:

"Where did Dyckman pick you up, my pretty?"

Kedzie's movie fame was unknown to Dyckman's crowd. She was treated,
accordingly, as some exquisite chorus-girl or cabaret-pony that he
had selected as a running-mate.

Dyckman could not openly resent what was subtly implied, but it
touched his chivalry, and since he was engaged to Kedzie he felt
that he ought at least to announce the fact. He was getting the
game without the name, and that seemed unfair to Kedzie.

Kedzie felt the same veiled scorn, and it alarmed her; yet when
Dyckman proposed the publication of their troth she forbade it
vigorously. She writhed at the worse than Tantalus fate that
compelled her to push from her own thirsty lips the grapes of
felicity.

She had no intention of committing bigamy, even if she had been
temptable to such recklessness. The inevitable brevity of its success
was only too evident. A large part of the fun of marrying Dyckman
would be the publication of it, and that would bring Gilfoyle back.
She never before longed so ardently to see her husband as now.

She finally wrote him a letter begging him to return to New York
for a conference. She couched it in luringly affectionate tones
and apologized lavishly for scratching his face when he called. She
addressed the appeal to the General Delivery in Chicago, as he had
directed in the letter he wrote as a blind.

She neglected, as usual, to put her own address on the envelope
or inside on the letter, which she signed with a mere "Anita."
Gilfoyle did not call for the letter in Chicago, since he was in
New York. It was held in Chicago for the legal period and then it
was sent to the Dead Letter Office, where a clerk wasted a deal
of time and ingenuity in an effort to trace the sender or the
addressee.

Kedzie meanwhile had watched for the postman and hunted through
her mail with frenzy. There was a vast amount of mail, for it is
one of the hardships of the movie business that the actors are fairly
showered with letters of praise, criticism, query, and flirtation.

But there was no letter ever from Gilfoyle.

Yet Gilfoyle was constantly within hailing distance. With the aid of
his friend Connery he had concocted a scheme for keeping Kedzie and
Dyckman under espionage. They had speedily learned that Dyckman was
in constant attendance on Kedzie, and that they were careless of
the hours alone, careless of appearances.

Gilfoyle never dreamed that the couple was chaperoned doubly by
a certain lukewarmth of emotion and by an ambition to become man
and wife. Gilfoyle imagined their relations to be as intimate as
their opportunities permitted. He suffered jealous wrath, and would
have assaulted Dyckman in public if Connery had not quelled him.

Connery kept a cool head in the matter because his heart was not
involved. He saw the wealth of Dyckman as the true object of their
attack, and he convinced Gilfoyle of the profitableness of a little
blackmail. He convinced Gilfoyle easily when they were far from
Kedzie and close to poverty; but when they hovered near Kedzie,
Connery had the convincing to do all over again.

He worked up an elaborate campaign for gaining entrance to Kedzie's
apartment without following the classic method of smashing the door
down. He disliked that noisy approach because it would command
notice; and publicity, as he well knew, is death to blackmail.

Connery adopted a familiar stratagem of the private detectives. He
went to the apartment one day when he knew that Kedzie was out, and
inquired for an alleged sister of his who had worked for Kedzie. He
claimed to be a soldier on furlough. He engaged the maid in a casual
parley which he led swiftly to a flirtation. She was a lonely maid
and her plighted lover was away on a canal-boat. Connery had little
difficulty in winning her to the acceptance of an invitation to visit
a movie-show on her first evening off.

He paid the girl flattering attentions, and when he brought her back,
gallantly asked for the key to unlock the door for her. He dropped
the key on the floor, stooped for it, pressed it against a bit of
soft soap he had in his left palm. Having secured the outline of
the key, he secured also a return engagement for the next evening
off. On this occasion he brought with him a duplicate of the key,
and when he unlocked the door for the maid this time he gave her
the duplicate and kept the original.

And now that he and Gilfoyle had an "open sesame" to the dovecote
they grew impatient with delay. Gilfoyle's landlady had also grown
impatient with delay, but Connery forced her to wait for what he
called the psychological moment.

And thus Kedzie moved about, her life watched over by an invisible
husband like a malignant Satan to whom she had sold her soul.




CHAPTER XXX

Jim Dyckman had many notes from Kedzie, gushing, all adjectives and
adverbs, capitalized and underscored. He left them about carelessly,
or locked them up and left the key. If he had not done that the lock
on his desk was one that could be opened with a hairpin or with
a penknife or with almost any key of a proper size.

There was no one to care except his valet. Dallam cared and read and
made notes. He was horrified at the thought of Dyckman's marrying a
movie actress. He would have preferred any intrigue to that disgrace.
It would mean the loss of a good position, too, for while Dyckman
was an easy boss, if he were going to be an easy marrier as well,
Dallam had too much self-respect to countenance a marriage beneath
them.

If he could only have known of Gilfoyle's existence and his quests,
how the two of them could have collaborated!

But Dallam's interest in life woke anew when one evening, as he was
putting away the clothes Dyckman had thrown off, he searched his
master's coat and found a letter from Mrs. Cheever.


DEAR OLD JIM,--What's happent you? I haven't seen you for ages.
Couldn't you spare this evening to me? I'm alone--as always--and
lonelier than usual. Do take pity on

Your devoted
CHARITY C.


That note, so lightly written in seeming, had been torn from
a desperate heart and written in tears and blood.

Since she had learned that her husband really loved Zada and that
she was going to mother him a child, Charity had been unable to
adjust her soul to the new problem.

The Reverend Doctor Mosely had promised her advice, but the poor man
could not match his counsel with the situation. He did not believe
in divorce, and yet he did not approve of illegal infants. How happy
he could have been with either problem, with t'other away! In his
dilemma he simply avoided Charity and turned his attention to the
more regular chores of his parish.

Charity understood his silence, and it served to deepen her own
perplexity. She was sure of only one thing--that she was caged
and forgotten.

Cheever came home less and less, and he was evidently so harrowed
with his own situation that Charity felt almost more sorry for him
than angry at him. She imagined that he must be enduring no little
from the whims and terrors of Zada. He was evidently afraid to
speak to Charity. To ask for her mercy was contrary to all his
nature. He never dreamed that the dictagraph had brought her with
him when he learned of Zada's intensely interesting condition, and
her exceedingly onerous demands. He did not dare ask Charity for
a divorce in order that he might legitimize this byblow of his.
He could imagine only that she would use the information for
some ruinous vengeance. So he dallied with his fate in dismal
irresolution.

Charity had his woes to bear as well as her own. She knew that she
had lost him forever. The coquetries she had used to win him back
were impossible even to attempt. He had no use for her forgiveness
or her charms. He was a mere specter in her home, doomed for his
sins to walk the night.

In despising herself she rendered herself lonelier. She had not even
herself for companion. Her heart had always been eager with love
and eager for it. The spirit that impelled her to endure hardships
in order to expend her surplusage of love was unemployed now. She
had feasted upon love, and now she starved.

Cheever had been a passionate courtier and, while he was interested,
a fiery devotee. When he abandoned her she suffered with the
devastation that deserted wives and recent widows endure but must
not speak of. It meant terribly much to Charity Coe to be left
alone. It was dangerous to herself, her creeds, her ideals.

She began to be more afraid of being alone than of any other fear.
She grew resentful toward the conventions that held her. She was like
a tigress in a wicker cage, growing hungrier, lither, more gracefully
fierce.

People who do not use their beauty lose it, and Charity had lost much
of hers in her vigils and labors in the hospitals, and it had waned
in her humiliations of Cheever's preference for another woman. Her
jealous shame at being disprized and notoriously neglected had given
her wanness and bitterness, instead of warmth and sweetness.

But now the wish to be loved brought back loveliness. She did not know
how beautiful she was again. She thought that she wanted to see Jim
Dyckman merely because she wanted to be flattered and because--as
women say in such moods--men are so much more sensible than women.
Often they mean more sensitive. Charity did not know that it was
love, not friendship, that she required when at last she wrote to
Jim Dyckman and begged him to call on her.

The note struck him hard. It puzzled him by its tone. And he,
remembering how vainly he had pursued her, forgot her disdain and
recalled only how worthy of pursuit she was. He hated himself for
his disloyalty to Anita in comparing his fiancee with Charity, and
he cursed himself for finding Charity infinitely Anita's superior
in every way. But he hated and cursed in vain.

Kedzie, or "Anita," as he called her, was an outsider, a pretty thing
like a geisha, fascinating by her oddity and her foreignness, but,
after all, an alien who could interest one only temporarily. There
was something transient about Kedzie in his heart, and he had felt
it vaguely the moment he found himself pledged to her forever.
But Charity--he had loved her from perambulator days. She was his
tradition. His thoughts and desires had always come home to Charity.

Yet he was astonished at the sudden upheaval of his old passion.
It shook off the new affair as a volcano burns away the weeds that
have grown about its crater. He supposed that Charity wanted to
take up the moving-picture scheme in earnest, and he repented the
fact that he had gone to the studio for information and had come
away with a flirtation.

One thing was certain: he must not fail to answer Charity's summons.
He had an engagement with Kedzie, but he called her up and told her
the politest lie he could concoct. Then he made himself ready and
put on his festival attire.

       *       *       *       *       *

Charity had grown sick of having people say, "How pale you are!"
"You've lost flesh, haven't you?" "Have you been ill, dear?"--those
tactless observations that so many people feel it necessary to make,
as if there were no mirrors or scales or symptoms for one's
information and distress.

Annoyed by these conversational harrowers, Charity had finally gone
to her dressmaker, Dutilh, and asked him to save her from vegetation!
He saw that she was a young woman in sore need of a compliment, and
he flattered her lavishly. He did more for her improvement in five
minutes than six doctors, seventeen clergymen, and thirty financiers
could have done. A compliment in time is a heart-stimulant with no
acetanilid reaction. Also he told her how wonderful she had been in
the past, recalling by its name and by the name of its French author
many a gown she had worn, as one would tell a great actress what
roles he had seen her in.

He clothed her with praise and encouragement, threw a mantle of
crimson velvet about her. And she crimsoned with pride, and her
hard, thin lips velveted with beauty.

She responded so heartily that he was enabled to sell her a gown
of very sumptuous mode, its colors laid on as with the long sweeps
of a Sargent's brush. A good deal of flesh was not left to the
imagination; as in a Sargent painting, the throat, shoulders, and
arms were part of the color scheme. It was a gown to stride in,
to stand still in, in an attitude of heroic repose, or to recline
in with a Parthenonian grandeur.

This gown did not fit her perfectly, just as it came from Paris, but
it revealed its possibilities and restored her shaken self-confidence
immeasurably. If women--or their husbands--could afford it, they
would find perhaps more consolation, restoration, and exaltation at
the dressmakers' than at--it would be sacrilege to say where.

By the time Charity's new gown was ready for the last fitting Charity
had lost her start, and when Dutilh went into the room where she had
dressed he was aghast at the difference. On the first day the gown
had thrilled her to a collaboration with it. Now she hardly stood
up in it. She drooped with exaggerated awkwardness, shrugged her
shoulders with sarcasm, and made a face of disgust.

Dutilh tried to mask his disappointment with anger. When Charity
groaned, "Aren't we awful--this dress and I?" he retorted: "You are,
but don't blame the gown. For God's sake, do something for the dress.
It would do wonders for you if you would help it!" He believed in
a golden rule for his wares: do for your clothes what you would have
them do for you.

He threatened not to let Charity have the gown at all at any price.
He ordered her to take it off. She refused. In the excitement of
the battle she grew more animated. Then he whirled her to a mirror
and said:

"Look like that, and you're a made woman."

She was startled by the vivacity, the authority she saw in her
features so long dispirited. She caught the trick of the expression.
And actors know that one's expression can control one's moods almost
as much as one's moods control one's expressions.

So she persuaded Dutilh to sell her the dress. When she got it she
did not know just when to wear it, for she was going out but rarely,
and then she did not want to be conspicuous. She decided to make
Jim Dyckman's call the occasion for the launching of the gown. His
name came up long before she had put it on to be locked in for
the evening.

When she thrust her arms forward like a diver and entered the gown
by way of the fourth dimension her maid cried out with pride, and,
standing with her fingertips scattered over her face, wept tears
down to her knuckles. She welcomed the prodigal back to beauty.

"Oh, ma'am, but it's good to see you lookin' lovely again!"

While she bent to the engagement of the hooks Charity feasted on
her reflection in the cheval-glass. She was afraid that she was
a little too much dressed up and a little too much undressed. There
in Dutilh's shop, with the models and the assistants about, she was
but a lay figure, a clothes-horse. At the opera she would have been
one of a thousand shoulder-showing women. For a descent upon one poor
caller, and a former lover at that, the costume frightened her.

But it was too late to change, and she caught up a scarf of gossamer
and twined it round her neck to serve as a mitigation.

Hearing her footsteps on the stairs at last, Dyckman hurried to
meet her. As she swept into the room she collided with him, softly,
fragrantly. They both laughed nervously, they were both a little
influenced.

She found the drawing-room too formal and led him into the library.
She pointed him to a great chair and seated herself on the corner
of a leather divan nearly as big as a touring-car. In the dark, hard
frame she looked richer than ever. He could not help seeing how much
more important she was than his Anita.

Anita was pretty and peachy, delicious, kissable, huggable,
a pleasant armful, a lapload of girlish mischief. Charity was
beautiful, noble, perilous, a woman to live for, fight for, die
for. Kedzie was to Charity as Rosalind to Isolde.

It was time for Jim to play Tristan, but he had no more blank
verse in him than a polo score-card. Yet the simple marks on such
a form stand for tremendous energy and the utmost thrill.

"Well, how are you, anyway, Charity? How goes it with you?" he
said. "Gee! but you look great to-night. What's the matter with
you? You're stunning!"

Charity laughed uncannily. "You're the only one that thinks so,
Jim."

"I always did admire you more than anybody else could; but, good
Lord! everybody must have eyes."

"I'm afraid so," said Charity. "But you're the only one that has
imagination about me."

"Bosh!"

"My husband can't see me at all."

"Oh, him!" Jim growled. "What's he up to now?"

"I don't know," said Charity. "I hardly ever see him. He's chucked
me for good."

Jim studied her with idolatry and with the intolerant ferocity of
a priest for the indifferent or the skeptical. The idol made her
plaint to her solitary worshiper.

"I'm horribly lonely, Jim. I don't go anywhere, meet anybody, do
anything but mope. Nobody comes to see me or take me out. Even you
kept away from me till I had to send for you."

"You ordered me off the premises in Newport, if you remember."

"Yes, I did, but I didn't realize that I was mistreating the only
admirer I had."

This was rather startling in its possible implications. It scared
Dyckman. He gazed at her until her eyes met his. There was something
in them that made him look away. Then he heard the gasp of a little
sob, and she began to cry.

"Why, Charity!" he said. "Why, Charity Coe!"

She smiled at the pet name and the tenderness in his voice, and
her tears stopped.

"Jim," she said, "I told Doctor Mosely all about my affairs, and
I simply spoiled his day for him and he dropped me. So I think
I'll tell you."

"Go to the other extreme, eh?" said Jim.

"Yes, I'm between the devil and the high-Church. I've no doubt
I'm to blame, but I can't seem to stand the punishment with no
change in sight. I've tried to, but I've got to the end of my string
and--well--whether you can help me or not--I've got to talk or die.
Do you mind if I run on?"

"God bless you, I'd be tickled to death."

"It will probably only ruin your evening."

"Help yourself. I'd rather have you wreck all my evenings
than--than--"

He had begun well, which was more than usual. She did not expect him
to finish. She thanked him with a look of more than gratitude.

"Jim," she said, "I've found out that my husband is--well--there's
a certain ex-dancer named L'Etoile, and he--she--they--"

Instead of being astounded, Dyckman was glum.

"Oh, you've found that out at last, have you? Maybe you'll learn
before long that there's trouble in France. But of course you know
that. You were over there. Why, before you came back he was dragging
that animal around with him. I saw him with her."

"You knew it as long ago as that?"

"Everybody knew it."

"Why didn't you tell me?"

"Because I'm a low-lived coward, I suppose. I tried to a dozen times,
but somehow I couldn't. By gad! I came near writing you an anonymous
letter. I couldn't seem to stoop to that, though, and I couldn't seem
to rise to telling you out and out. And now that you know, what are
you going to do about it?"

"That's what I don't know. Doctor Mosely wanted me to try to
get him back."

"Doctor Mosely's got softening of the brain. To think of your trying
to persuade a man to live with you! You of all people, and him of
all people! Agh! If you got him, what would you have? And how long
would you keep him? You can't make a household pet out of a laughing
hyena. Chuck him, I say."

"But that means the divorce-court, Jim."

"What of it? It's cleaner and sweeter than this arrangement."

"But the newspapers?"

"Ah, what do you care about them? They'd only publish what everybody
that knows you knows already. And what's the diff' if a lot of
strangers find out that you're too decent to tolerate that man's
behavior? Somebody is always roasting even the President, but he
gets along somehow. A lot of good people oppose divorce, but I was
reading that the best people used to oppose anesthetics and education
and republics. It's absolutely no argument against a thing to say
that a lot of the best people think it is outrageous. They've always
fought everything, especially freedom for the women. They said it
was dangerous for you to select your husbands, or manage your
property, or learn to read, or go out to work, or vote, or be in
a profession--or even be a war nurse. The hatred of divorce is all
of a piece with the same old habit good people have of trying to
mind other people's business for 'em."

"But Doctor Mosely says that marriage is a sacrament."

"Well, if a marriage like yours is a sacrament, give me a nice,
decent white-slave market."

"That's the way it seems to me, but the Church, especially our
Church, is so ferocious. Doctor Mosely preached a sermon against
divorce and remarriage, and it was frightful what he said about
women who change husbands. I'm afraid of it, Jim. I can't face the
abuse and the newspapers, and I can't face the loneliness, either.
I'm desperately lonely."

"For him?" Jim groaned.

"No, I've got over loving him. I'll never endure him again,
especially now that she has a better right to him."

She could not bring herself at first to tell him what she knew
of Zada, but at length she confessed that she had listened to the
dictagraph and had heard that Zada was to be a mother. Dyckman was
dumfounded; then he snarled:

"Thank God it's not you that's going to be--for him--Well, don't you
call that divorce enough? How can you call your marriage a sacrament
when he has gone and made a real sacrament with another woman? It
takes two to keep a sacrament, doesn't it? Or does it? I don't think
I know what a sacrament is. But I tell you, there was never a plainer
duty in the world. Turn him over to his Zada. She's the worst woman
in town, and she's too good for him, at that. I don't see how you
can hesitate! How long can you stand it?"

"I don't know. I'm ready to die now. I'd rather die. I'd better die."

And once more she was weeping, now merely a lonely little girl. He
could not resist the impulse to go to her side. He dropped down by
her and patted her wrist gawkily. She caught his hand and clenched
it with strange power. He could tell by her throat that her heart
was leaping like a wild bird against a cage.

His own heart beat about his breast like a bird that has been set
frantic by another bird, and his soul ached for her. He yearned to
put his long arm about her and hold her tight, but he could not.

He had never seen her so. He could not understand what it was that
made a darkling mist of her eyes and gave her parted lips such an
impatient ecstasy of pain.

Suddenly, with an intuition unusual to him, he understood. He shrank
from her, but not with contempt or blame. There was something divine
about his merciful comprehension, but his only human response was
a most ungodly wrath. He got to his feet, muttering:

"I ought to kill him. Maybe I will. I've got to beat him within
an inch of his life."

Charity was dazed by his abrupt revolt. "What do you mean, Jim?
Who is it you want to beat?"

He laughed, a bloodthirsty laugh. "I'll find him!"

He rushed out into the hall, caught up his hat and coat, and was
gone. Charity was bewildered out of her wits. She could not imagine
what had maddened him. She only knew that Dyckman also had abandoned
her. He would find Cheever and fight him as one stag another. And
the only result would be the death of one or both and a far more
odious disgrace than the scandal she had determined to avoid.




CHAPTER XXXI

Dyckman was at least half mad, and half inspired. Charity had been
his lifelong religion. He had thought of her with ardor, but also
with a kind of awe. He had wanted to be her husband. Failing to win
her, he had been horrified to see that Cheever, possessing her, was
still not satisfied.

He had never dreamed what this neglect might mean to her. He had
not thought of her as mere woman, after all, with more than pride
to satisfy, with more than a mind to suffer. When the realization
overwhelmed him her nobility was not diminished in his eyes,
but to all her former qualities was added the human element. She
was flesh and blood, and a martyr in the flames. And the ingrate
who had the godlike privilege of her embrace abandoned her for
a public creature.

Dyckman felt himself summoned to avenge her.

It happened that he found the Cheever limousine waiting outside.
He said to the chauffeur:

"Where does Miss Zada L'Etoile live?"

The chauffeur was startled. He answered, with a touch of raillery:

"Search me, sir. How should I know?"

"I want none of your back talk," said Dyckman, ready to maul the
chauffeur or anybody for practice. He took out his pocket-book and
lifted the first bill he came to. It was a yellow boy. He repeated,
"Where does Zada L'Etoile live?"

The chauffeur told him and got the bill. It was better than the
poke in the eye he could have had instead.

Dyckman had sent his own car home. He had difficulty in finding
a taxicab on Fifth Avenue along there. At length he stopped one
and named the apartment-house where Zada lived.

The hall-boy was startled by his manner, amazed to hear the famous
Dyckman ask for Miss L'Etoile. He telephoned the name while Dyckman
fumed. After some delay he was told to come up.

Zada was alone--at least Cheever was not there. She had been
astounded when Dyckman's name came through the telephone. Her
first thought had been that Cheever had met with an accident and
that Dyckman was bringing the news. She had given up the hope
of involving Dyckman with Mrs. Cheever, after wasting Cheever's
money on vain detectives.

When Dyckman was ushered in she greeted him from her divan.

"Pardon my negligee," she said. "I'm not very well."

He saw at a glance that the dictagraph had told the truth. She was
entirely too well. He felt his wrath at Zada vanishing. But this
also he transferred to Cheever's account. He spoke as quietly as
he could, though his face revealed his excitement.

"Sorry to trouble you, but I had hoped to find Mr. Cheever here."

"Mr. Cheever?! Here?!" Zada exclaimed, with that mixture of the
interrogation and exclamation points for which we have no symbol.
She tried to look surprised at the unimaginable suggestion of
Cheever's being in her environs. She succeeded as well as Dyckman
did in pretending that his errand was trivial.

"Er--yes, I imagined you might happen to know where I could find
him. I have a little business with him."

Zada thought to crush him with a condescension--a manicurial
sarcasm:

"Have you been to the gentleman's home?"

Dyckman laughed: "Yes, but he wasn't there. He isn't there much
nowadays--they say."

"Oh, do they?" Zada sneered. "Well, did They tell you he would be
here?"

"No, but I thought--"

"Better try his office in the morning."

"Thanks. I can't wait. What club does he affect most now?"

"Ask They," said Zada, ending the interview with a labored yawn.
But when Dyckman bowed and turned to go, her curiosity bested her
indignation. "In case I should by any chance see him, could I give
him your message?"

Dyckman laughed a sort of pugilistic laugh, and his self-conscious
fist asserted itself.

"No, thanks, I'm afraid you couldn't. Good-by."

Zada saw his big fingers gathering--convening, as it were, into a
fist like a mace, and she was terrified for her man. She scrambled
to her feet and caught Dyckman in the hall.

"What are you going to do to Mr. Cheever?"

Dyckman answered in the ironic slang, "I'm not going to do a thing
to him."

Zada's terror increased. "What harm has he ever done to you?"

"I didn't say he had done me any harm."

"Is it because of his wife?"

"Leave her out of it."

There was the old phrase again. Cheever kept hurling it at her
whenever she referred to the third corner of the triangle.

Zada remembered when Cheever had threatened to kill Dyckman if he
found him. Now he would be unarmed. He was not so big a man as
Dyckman. She could see him being throttled slowly to death, leaving
her and her child-to-be unprotected in their shameful folly.

"For God's sake, don't!" she implored him. "I'm not well. I mustn't
have any excitement, I beg you--for my sake--"

"For your sake," said Dyckman, with a scorn that changed to pity
as she clung to him--"for your sake I'll give him a couple of extra
jolts."

That was rather dazzling, the compliment of having Jim Dyckman as
her champion! Her old habit of taking everybody's flattery made her
forget for the moment that she was now a one-man woman. Her clutch
relaxed under the compliment just long enough for Dyckman to escape
without violence. He darted through the door and closed it behind
him.

She tugged at the inside knob, but he was so long that he could
hold the outside knob with one hand and reach the elevator-bell
with the other.

When the car came up he released the knob and lifted his hat with
a pleasant "Good-night." She dared not pursue him in the garb
she wore.

She returned terrified to her room. Then she ran to the telephone to
pursue Cheever and warn him. They had quarreled at the dinner-table.
He had left her on the ground that it was dangerous for her to be
excited as he evidently excited her. It is one of the most craven
shifts of a man for ending an endless wrangle with a woman.

Zada tried three clubs before she found Cheever. When she heard
his voice at last she was enraptured. She tried to entice him into
her own shelter.

"I'm sorry I was so mean. Come on home and make peace with me."

"All right, dear, I will."

"Right away?"

"After a while, darling. I'm sitting in a little game of poker."

"You'd better not keep me waiting!" she warned. The note was an
unfortunate reminder of his bondage. It rattled his shackles. He
could not even have a few hours with old cronies at the club. She
was worse than Charity had ever dreamed of being. She heard the
resentment in his answer and felt that he would stay away from her
for discipline. She threw aside diplomacy and tried to frighten him
home.

"Jim Dyckman is looking for you."

"Dyckman? Me! Why?"

"He wants to beat you up."

Cheever laughed outright at this. "You're crazy, darling. What
has Dyckman got against me?"

"I don't know, but I know he's hunting you."

"I haven't laid eyes on him for weeks. We've had no quarrel."

Zada was frantic. She howled across the wire: "Come home, I beg
and implore you. He'll hurt you--he may kill you."

Again Cheever laughed: "You're having hallucinations, my love.
You'll feel better in the morning. Where the deuce did you get
such a foolish notion, anyway?"

"From Jim Dyckman," she stormed. "He was here looking for you. If
anybody's going crazy, he's the one. I had a struggle with him. He
broke away. I begged him not to harm you, but he said he'd give you
a few extra jolts for my sake. Please, please, don't let him find
you there."

Cheever was half convinced and quite puzzled. He knew that Dyckman
had never forgiven him for marrying Charity. The feud had smoldered.
He could not conceive what should have revived it, unless Charity
had been talking. He had not thought of any one's punishing him for
neglecting her. But if Dyckman had enlisted in her cause--well,
Cheever was afraid of hardly anything in the world except boredom
and the appearance of fear. He answered Zada with a gruff:

"Let him find me if he wants to. Or since you know him so well,
tell me where he'll be, and I'll go find him."

He could hear Zada's strangled moan. How many times, since male
and female began, have women made wild, vain protests against
the battle-habit, the duel-tribunal? Mothers, daughters, wives,
mistresses, they have been seldom heard and have been forced to wait
remote in anguish till their man has come back or been brought back,
victorious or baffled or defeated, maimed, wounded, or dead.

It meant everything to Zada that her mate should not suffer either
death or publicity. But chiefly her love of him made outcry now. She
could not endure the vision of her beloved receiving the hammering
of the giant Dyckman.

The telephone crackled under the load of her prayers, but Cheever
had only one answer:

"If you want me to run away from him or anybody, you don't get your
wish, my darling."

Finally she shrieked, "If you don't come home I'll come there and
get you."

"Ladies are not allowed in the main part of this club, dearest,"
said Cheever. "Thank God there are a few places where two men can
settle their affairs without the help of womanly intuition."

"He wants to pound you to death," she screamed. "If you don't
promise me, I'll come there and break in if I have to scratch
the eyes out of the doorkeeper."

He knew that she was capable of doing this very thing; so he made
answer, "All right, my dear. I surrender."

"You'll come home?"

"Yes, indeed. Right away."

"Oh, thank God! You do love me, then. How soon will you be here?"

"Very shortly, unless the taxi breaks down."

"Hurry!"

"Surely. Good-by!"

He hung up the reverberant receiver and said to the telephone-boy:
"If anybody calls me, I've gone out. No matter who calls me, I'm
out."

"Yes, sir."

Then he went to the card-room, found that the game had gone on
without him, cashed in his chips, and excused himself. He was neither
winning nor losing, so that he could not be accused of "cold feet."
That was one of the most intolerable accusations to him. He could
violate any of the Commandments, but in the sportsman's decalogue
"Thou shalt not have cold feet" was one that he honored in the
observance, not the breach.

He went down to the reading-room, a palatial hall fifty yards long
with a table nearly as big as a railroad platform, on a tremendous
rug as wide and deep as a lawn. About it were chairs and divans that
would have satisfied a lotus-eater.

Cheever avoided proffers of conversation and pretended to read the
magazines and newspapers. He kept his eyes on the doors. He did not
want to take any one into his confidence, as he felt that, after all,
Zada might have been out of her head. He did not want any seconds
or bottle-holders. He was not afraid. Still, he did not care to be
surprised by a mad bull. He felt that he could play toreador with
neatness and despatch provided he could foresee the charge.

Among the magazines Cheever glanced at was one with an article on
various modes of self-defense, jiu-jitsu, and other devices by which
any clever child could apparently remove or disable a mad elephant.
But Cheever's traditions did not incline to such methods. He had the
fisting habit. He did not feel called toward clinching or choking,
twisting, tripping, knifing, swording, or sandbagging. His wrath
expressed itself, and gaily, in the play of the triceps muscle.
For mobility he used footwork and headwork. For shield he had
his forearms or his open hands--for weapons, the ten knuckles at
the other end of the exquisite driving-shafts beginning in his
shoulder-blades.

He had been a clever fighter from childhood. He had been a successful
boxer and had followed the art in its professional and amateur
developments. He knew more of prize-ring history and politics than
of any other. He often regretted that his inherited money had robbed
him of a career as a heavy-weight. He was not so big as Dyckman, but
he had made fools of bigger men. He felt that the odds were a trifle
in his favor, especially if Dyckman were angry, as he must be to go
roaring about town frightening one silly woman for another's sake.

He would have preferred not to fight in the club. It was the best
of all possible clubs, and he supposed that he would be expelled
for profaning its sacrosanctity with a vulgar brawl. But anything
was better than cold feet.

Finally his hundredth glance at the door revealed Jim Dyckman. He
was a long way off, but he looked bigger than Cheever remembered
him. Also he was calmer than Cheever had hoped him to be, and not
drunk, as he half expected.

Dyckman caught sight of Cheever, glared a moment, tossed his head
as if it had antlers on it, and came forward grimly and swiftly.

A few members of the club spoke to him. An attendant or two,
carrying cocktails or high-balls in or empty glasses out, stepped
aside.

Dyckman advanced down the room, and his manner was challenge enough.
But he paused honorably to say, "Cheever, I'm looking for you."

"So I hear."

"You had fair warning, then, from your--woman?"

"Which one?" said Cheever, with his irresistible impudence.

That was the fulminate that exploded Dyckman's wrath. "You
blackguard!" he roared, and plunged. His left hand was out and
open, his great right fist back. As he closed, it flashed past
him and drove into the spot where Cheever's face was smirking.

But the face was gone. Cheever had bent his neck just enough to
escape the fist. He met the weight of Dyckman's rush with all his
own weight in a short-arm jab that rocked Dyckman's whole frame
and crumpled the white cuirass of his shirt.

The fight was within an ace of being ended then and there, but
Dyckman's belly was covered with sinew, and he digested the bitter
medicine. He tried to turn his huge grunt into a laugh. He was
at least not to be guilty of assaulting a weakling.

Dyckman was a bit of a boxer, too. Like most rich men's sons, he
was practised in athletics. The gentleman of our day carries no
sword and no revolver; he carries his weapons in his gloves.

Dyckman acknowledged Cheever's skill and courage by deploying and
falling back. He sparred a moment. He saw that Cheever was quicker
than he at the feint and the sidestep.

He grew impatient at this dancing duet. His wrath was his worst
enemy and Cheever's ally. Cheever taunted him, and he heard the
voices of the club members who were rushing from their chairs in
consternation, and running in from the other rooms, summoned by
the wireless excitement that announces fights.

There was not going to be time for a bout, and the gallery was
bigger than Dyckman had expected. He went in hell-for-leather. He
felt a mighty satisfaction when his good left hand slashed through
Cheever's ineffectual palms, reached that perky little mustache
and smeared that amiable mouth with blood.

In the counterblow the edge of Cheever's cuff caught on Dyckman's
knuckles and ripped the skin. This saved Dyckman's eye from
mourning. And now wherever he struck he left a red mark. It
helped his target-practice.

Cheever gave up trying to mar Dyckman's face and went for his
waistcoat. All is fair in such a war, and below the belt was his
favorite territory. He hoped to put Dyckman out. Dyckman tried
to withhold his vulnerable solar plexus by crouching, but Cheever
kept whizzing through his guard like a blazing pinwheel even when
it brought his jaw in reach of an uppercut.

Dyckman clinched and tried to bear him down, but Cheever, reaching
round him, battered him with the terrific kidney-blow, and Dyckman
flung him off.

And now servants came leaping into the fray, venturing to lay hands
on the men. They could hear older members pleading: "Gentlemen!
Gentlemen! For God's sake remember where you are." One or two went
calling, "House Committee!"

Such blows as were struck now were struck across other heads and
in spite of other arms. Both men were seized at length and dragged
away, petted and talked to like infuriated stallions. They stood
panting and bleeding, trying not to hear the voices of reason. They
glared at each other, and it became unendurable to each that the
other should be able to stand erect and mock him.

As if by a signal agreed on, they wrenched and flung aside their
captors and dashed together again, forgetting science, defense,
caution, everything but the lust of carnage. Dyckman in freeing
himself left his coat in the grasp of his retainers.

There is nothing more sickeningly thrilling than the bare-handed
ferocity of two big men, all hate and stupid power, smashing and
being smashed, trying to defend and destroy and each longing to
knock the other lifeless before his own heart is stopped. It
seemed a pity to interrupt it, and it was perilous as well.

For a long moment the two men flailed each other, bored in, and
staggered out.

It was thud and thwack, slash and gouge. Wild blows went through
the air like broadswords, making the spectators groan at what they
might have done had they landed. Blows landed and sent a head back
with such a snap that one looked for it on the floor. Flesh split,
and blood spurted. Cheever reached up and swept his nose and mouth
clear of gore--then shot his reeking fist into Dyckman's heart as
if he would drive it through.

It was amazing to see Dyckman's answering swing batter Cheever
forward to one knee. Habit and not courtesy kept Dyckman from
jumping him. He stood off for Cheever to regain his feet. It was not
necessary, for Cheever's agility had carried him out of range, but
the tolerance maddened him more than anything yet, and he ceased
to duck and dodge. He stood in and battered at Dyckman's stomach
till a gray nausea began to weaken his enemy. Dyckman grew afraid
of a sudden blotting out of consciousness. He had known it once when
the chance blow of an instructor had stretched him flat for thirty
seconds.

He could not keep Cheever off far enough to use his longer reach.
He forgot everything but the determination to make ruins of that
handsome face before he went out. He knocked loose one tooth and
bleared an eye, but it was not enough. Finally Cheever got to him
with a sledge-hammer smash in the groin. It hurled Dyckman against
and along the big table, just as he put home one magnificent,
majestic, mellifluous swinge with all his body in it. It planted
an earthquake under Cheever's ear.

Dyckman saw him go backward across a chair and spinning over it and
with it and under it to the floor. Then he had only the faintness
and the vomiting to fight. He made one groping, clutching, almighty
effort to stand up long enough to crow like a victorious fighting
cock, and he did. He stood up. He held to the table; he did not
drop. And he said one triumphant, "Humph!"

And now the storm of indignation began. Dyckman was a spent and
bankrupt object, and anybody could berate him. A member of the house
committee reviled him with profanity and took the names of witnesses
who could testify that Dyckman struck the first blow.

The pitiful stillness of Cheever, where a few men knelt about him,
turned the favor to him. One little whiffet told Dyckman to his
face that it was a dastardly thing he had done. He laughed. He had
his enemy on the floor. He did not want everything.

Dyckman made no answer to the accusations. He did not say that he
was a crusader punishing an infidel for his treachery to a poor,
neglected woman. He had almost forgotten what he was fighting for.
He was too weak even to oppose the vague advice he heard that
Cheever should be taken "home." He had a sardonic impulse to give
Zada's address, but he could not master his befuddled wits enough
for speech.

The little fussy rooster who called Dyckman dastardly said that he
ought to be arrested. The reception he got for his proposal to bring
a policeman into the club or take a member out of it into the jail
and the newspapers was almost annihilating. The chairman of the house
committee said:

"I trust that it is not necessary to say that this wretched and most
unheard-of affair must be kept--unheard of. But I may say that I have
here a list of the members present, and I shall make a list of the
club servants present. If one word of this leaks out, each gentleman
present will be brought before the council, and every servant will
be discharged immediately--every servant without regard to guilt,
innocence, or time of service."

Dyckman would have liked to spend the night at the club, but its
hospitable air had chilled. He sent for his big coat, turned up
the collar, pulled his hat low, and crept into a taxicab. His father
and mother were out, and he got to his room without explanations.
His valet, Dallam, gasped at the sight of him, but Dyckman laughed:

"You ought to see the other fellow."

Then he crept into the tub, thence into his bed, and slept till he
was called to the telephone the next morning by Mrs. Cheever.

As he might have expected, Charity was as far as possible from
gratitude. The only good news she gave him was that Cheever had
been brought home half dead, terribly mauled, broken in pride,
and weeping like a baby with his shame. Dyckman could not help
swelling a little at that.

But when Charity told him that Cheever accused her of setting him
on and swore that he would get even with them both, Dyckman realized
that fists are poor poultices for bruises, and revenge the worst
of all solutions. Finally, Charity denounced Jim and begged him
once more to keep out of her sight and out of her life.

Dyckman was in the depths of the blues, and a note to the effect
that he had been suspended from his club, to await action looking
toward his expulsion, left him quite alone in the world.

In such a mood Kedzie Thropp called him up, with a cheery hail
that rejoiced him like the first cheep of the first robin after
a miserable winter. He said that he would call that evening,
with the greatest possible delight. She said that she was very
lonely for him, and they should have a blissful evening with just
themselves together.

But it proved to be a rather crowded occasion in Kedzie's apartment.
Her father and mother reached there before Dyckman did, to Kedzie's
horror--and theirs.




CHAPTER XXXII

Turn a parable upside down, and nearly everything falls out of it.

Even the beautiful legend of the prodigal son returning home to
his parents could not retain its value when it was topsy-turvied
by the Thropps.

Their son was a daughter, but she had run away from them to batten
on the husks of city life, and had prospered exceedingly. It was
her parents who heard of her fame and had journeyed to the city
to ask her forgiveness and throw themselves on her neck. Kedzie
was now wonderful before the nation under the nom de film of Anita
Adair; but if her father had not spanked her that fatal day in New
York she might never have known glory. So many people have been
kicked up-stairs in this world.

But Kedzie had not forgiven the outrage, and her father had no
intention of reminding her how much she owed to it. In fact, he
wished he had thought to cut off his right hand, scripturally,
before it caused him to offend.

When the moving-picture patrons in Nimrim, Missouri, first saw
Kedzie's pictures on the screen they were thrilled far beyond the
intended effect of the thriller. The name "Anita Adair" had meant
nothing, of course, among her old neighbors, but everybody had known
Kedzie's ways ever since first she had had ways. Her image had no
sooner walked into her first scene than fellows who had kissed her,
and girls who had been jealous of her, began to buzz.

"Look, that's Kedzie."

"For mercy's sake, Kedzie Thropp!"

Yep, that's old Throppie."

"Why--would you believe it?--that's old Ad Thropp's girl--the one
what was lost so long."

In the Nimrim Nickeleum films were played twice of an evening. The
seven-thirty audience was usually willing to go home and leave space
for the nine-o'clock audience unless the night was cold. But on this
immortal evening people were torn between a frenzy to watch Kedzie
go by again and a frenzy to run and get Mr. and Mrs. Thropp.

A veritable Greek chorus ran and got the Thropps, and lost their
seats. There was no room for the Thropps to get in. If the manager
had not thrown out a few children and squeezed the parents through
the crowd they would have lost the view.

The old people stood in the narrow aisle staring at the apotheosis
of this brilliant creature in whose existence they had collaborated.
They had the mythological experience of two old peasants seeing their
child translated as in a chariot of fire. Their eyes were dazzled
with tears, for they had mourned her as lost, either dead in body
or dead of soul. They had imagined her drowned and floating down the
Bay, or floating along the sidewalks of New York. They had feared
for her the much-advertised fate of the white slaves--she might be
bound out to Singapore or destined for Alaskan dance-halls. There
are so many fates for parents to dread for their lost children.

To have their Kedzie float home to them on pinions of radiant beauty
was an almost intolerable beatitude. Kedzie's mother started down
the aisle, crying, "Kedzie, my baby! My little lost baby!" before
Adna could check her.

Kedzie did not answer her mother, but went on with her work as if
she were deaf. She came streaming from the projection-machine in
long beams of light. This vivid, smiling, weeping, dancing, sobbing
Kedzie was only a vibration rebounding from a screen. Perhaps that
is all any of us are.

One thing was certain: the Thropps determined to redeem their lost
lamb as soon as they could get to New York. Their lost lamb was
gamboling in blessed pastures. The Nimrim people spoke to the parents
with reverence, as if their son had been elected President--which
would not have been, after all, so wonderful as their daughter's
being a screen queen.

There is no end to the astonishments of our every-day life. While
the Thropps had been watching their daughter disport before them in
a little dark room in Missouri, and other people in numbers of other
cities were seeing her in duplicate, she herself was in none of the
places, but in her own room--with Jim Dyckman paying court to her.

Kedzie was engaged in reeling off a new life of her own for the
astonishment of the angels, or whatever audience it is for whose
amusement the eternal movie show of mankind is performed. Kedzie's
story was progressing with cinematographic speed and with transitions
almost as abrupt as the typical five-reeler.

Kedzie was an anxious spectator as well as an actor in her own life
film. She did not see how she could get out of the tangled situation
her whims, her necessities, and her fates had constructed about her.
She had been more or less forced into a betrothal with the wealthy
Jim Dyckman before she had dissolved her marriage with Tommie
Gilfoyle. She could not find Gilfoyle, and she grew frenzied with
the dread that her inability to find him might thwart all her dreams.

Then came the evening when Jim Dyckman telephoned her that he could
not keep his appointment with her. It was the evening he responded
to Charity Coe's appeal and met Peter Cheever fist to fist. Kedzie
heard, in the polite lie he told, a certain tang of prevarication,
and that frightened her. Why was Jim Dyckman trying to shake her?
Once begun, where would the habit end?

That was a dull evening for Kedzie. She stuck at home without other
society than her boredom and her terrors. She had few resources for
the enrichment of solitude. She tried to read, but she could not
find a popular novel or a short story in a magazine exciting enough
to keep her mind off the excruciating mystery of the next instalment
in her own life. Her heart ached with the fear that she might never
know the majesty of being Mrs. Jim Dyckman. That almost royal
prerogative grew more and more precious the more she feared to lose
it. She imagined the glory with a ridiculous extravagance. Her
theory of the life lived by the wealthy aristocrats was fantastic,
but she liked it and longed for it.

The next day she waited to hear from Jim till she could endure the
anxiety no longer. She ventured to call him at his father's home.
She waited with trepidation while she was put through to his room,
but his enthusiasm when he recognized her voice refreshed her hopes
and her pride. She did not know that part of her welcome was due to
the fierce rebuke Charity Coe had inflicted on him a little before
because he had mauled her husband into a wreck.

That evening she waited for Jim Dyckman's arrival with an ardor
almost akin to love. He had begged off from dinner. He did not
explain that he carried two or three visible fist marks from
Cheever's knuckles which he did not wish to exhibit in a public
restaurant.

So Kedzie dined at home in solitary gloom. She had only herself
for guest and found herself most stupid company.

She dined in her bathrobe and began immediately after dinner
to dress for conquest. She hoped that Dyckman would take her out
to the theater or a dance, and she put on her best bib and tucker,
the bib being conspicuously missing. She was taking a last look at
the arrangement of her little living-room when the telephone-bell
rang and the maid came to say:

"'Scuse me, Miss Adair, but hall-boy says your father and mother
is down-stairs."

Kedzie almost fainted. She did not dare refuse to see them. She had
not attained that indifference to the opinions of servants which is
the only real emancipation from being the servant of one's servants.

While she fumbled with her impulses the maid rather stated than
asked, "Shall I have 'em sent up, of course?"

"Of course," Kedzie snapped.




CHAPTER XXXIII

The Thropps knew Kedzie well enough to be afraid of her. A parental
intuition told them that if they wrote to her she would be a long
while answering; if they telephoned her she would be out of town.
So they came unannounced. It had taken them the whole day to trace
her. They learned with dismay that she was no longer "working" at
the Hyperfilm Studio.

Adna Thropp and his wife were impressed by the ornate lobby of the
apartment-house, by the livery of the hall-boy and the elevator-boy,
by the apron and cap of the maid who let them in, and by the hall
furniture.

But when they saw their little Kedzie standing before them in her
evening gown--her party dress as Mrs. Thropp would say--they were
overwhelmed. A daughter is a fearsome thing to a father, especially
when she is grown up and dressed up. Adna turned his eyes away from
his shining child.

But the sense of shame is as amenable to costume as to the lack of
it, and Kedzie--the shoulder-revealer--was as much shocked by what
her parents had on as they by what she had off.

The three embraced automatically rather than heartily, and Kedzie
came out of her mother's bosom chilled, though it was a warm night
and Mrs. Thropp had traveled long. Also there was a lot of her.

Kedzie gave her parents the welcome that the prodigal's elder brother
gave him. She was thinking: "What will Jim Dyckman say when he learns
that my real name is Thropp and sees this pair of Thropps? They look
as if their name would be Thropp."

Adna made the apologies--glad tidings being manifestly out of place.

"Hope we 'ain't put you out, daughter. We thought we'd s'prise you.
We went to the fact'ry. Man at the door says you wasn't workin' there
no more. Give us this address. Right nice place here, ain't it? Looks
like a nice class of folks lived here."

Kedzie heard the rounded "r" and the flat "a" which she had discarded
and scorned the more because she had once practised them. Children
are generally disappointed in their parents, since they cherish
ideals to which few parents may conform from lack of time, birth,
breeding, or money. Kedzie was not in any mood for parents that
night, anyway, but if she had to have parents, she would have chosen
an earl and a countess with a Piccadilly accent and a concert-grand
manner. Such parents it would have given her pleasure and pride to
exhibit to Dyckman. They would awe-inspire him and arrange the
marriage settlement, whatever that was.

But these poor old shabby dubs in their shabby duds--a couple who
were plebeian even in Jayville! If there had not been such a popular
prejudice against mauling one's innocent parents about, Kedzie would
probably have taken her father and mother to the dumb-waiter and sent
them down to the ash-can.

As she hung between despair and anxiety the telephone-bell rang. Jim
Dyckman called her up to say that he was delayed for half an hour.
Kedzie came back and invited her parents in. It made her sick to see
their awkwardness among the furniture. They went like scows adrift.
They priced everything with their eyes, and the beauty was spoiled
by the estimated cost.

Mrs. Thropp asked Kedzie how she was half a dozen times, and, before
Kedzie could answer, went on to tell about her own pains. Mr. Thropp
was freshly alive to the fact that New York's population is divided
into two classes--innocent visitors and resident pirates.

While they asked Kedzie questions that she did not care to answer,
and answered questions she had not cared to ask, Kedzie kept
wondering how she could get rid of them before Dyckman came. She
thanked Heaven that there was no guest-room in her apartment. They
could not live with her, at least.

Suddenly it came over the pretty, bewildered little thing with her
previous riddle of how to get rid of a last-year's husband so that
she might get a new model--suddenly it came over Kedzie that she had
a tremendous necessity for help, advice, parentage. The crying need
for a father and a mother enhanced the importance of the two she had
on hand.

She broke right into her mother's description of a harrowing lumbago
she had suffered from: it was that bad she couldn't neither lay
nor set--that is to say, comfortable. Kedzie's own new-fangled
pronunciations and phrases fell from her mind, and she spoke in
purest Nimrim:

"Listen, momma and poppa. I'm in a peck of trouble, and maybe you
can help me out."

"Is it money?" Adna wailed, sepulchrally.

"No, unless it's too much of the darned stuff."

Adna gasped at the paradox. He had no time to comment before she
assailed him with:

"You see, I've gone and got married."

This shattered them both so that the rest was only shrapnel after
shell. But it was a leveling bombardment of everything near, dear,
respectable, sacred. They were fairly rocked by each detonation
of fact.

"Yes, I went and married a dirty little rat--name's Gilfoyle--he
thinks my real name's Anita Adair. I got it out of a movie, first
day I ran off from you folks. I had an awful time, momma--like
to starved--would have, only for clerkin' in a candy-store. Then
I got work posln' for commercial photographers. Did you see the
Breathasweeta Chewin' Gum Girl? No? That was me. Then I was a dancer
for a while--on the stage--and--the other girls were awful cats. But
what d'you expect? The life was terrible. We didn't wear much clo'es.
That didn't affect me, though; some of those nood models are terribly
respectable--not that I was nood, o' course. But--well--so I married
Tommie Gilfoyle. I don't know how I ever came to. He must have
mesmerized me, I guess."

"What did he work at?" said Adna.

"Poetry."

"Is poetry work?"

"Work? That's all it is. Poetry is all work and no pay. You should
have seen that gink sweatin' over the fool stuff. He'd work a week
for five dollars' worth of foolishness. And besides, as soon as he
married me he lost his job."

"Poetry?" Adna mumbled.

"Advertising."

"Oh!"

"Well, we didn't live together very long, and I was perfectly
miser'ble every minute."

"You poor little honey child!" said Mrs. Thropp, who felt her lamb
coming back to her, and even Adna reached over and squeezed her hand
and rubbed her knuckles with his rough thumb uncomfortably.

But it was good to have allies, and Kedzie went on:

"By an' by Gilfoyle got the offer of a position in Chicago, and he
couldn't get there without borrowing all I had. But I was glad enough
to pay it to him. I'd 'a' paid his fare to the moon if he'd 'a' gone
there. Then I got a position with a moving-picture company--as
a jobber--I began very humbly at first, you see, and I underwent
great hardships." (She was quoting now from one of her favorite
interviews.) "My talent attracted the attention of the director,
Mr. Ferriday. He stands very high in the p'fession, but he's very
conceited--very! He thought he owned me because he was the first
one I let direct me. He wanted me to marry him."

"Did you?" said Adna, who was prepared for anything.

"I should say not!" said Kedzie. "How could I, with a husband in
Chicago? He wasn't much of a husband--just enough to keep me from
marrying a real man. For one day, who should come to the studio
but Jim Dyckman!"

"Any relation to the big Dyckmans?" said Adna.

"He's the son of the biggest one of them all," said Kedzie.

"And you know him?"

"Do I know him? Doesn't he want to marry me? Isn't that the whole
trouble? He's coming here this evening."

To Adna, the humble railroad claim-agent, the careless tossing off
of the great railroad name of Dyckman was what it would have been
to a rural parson to hear Kedzie remark:

"I'm giving a little dinner to-night to my friends Isaiah, Jeremiah,
and Mr. Apostle Paul."

When the shaken wits of the parents began to return to a partial
calm they remembered that Kedzie had mentioned somebody named
Gilfoyle--_Gargoyle_ would have been a better name for him,
since he grinned down in mockery upon a cathedral of hope.

Adna whispered, "When did you divorce--the other feller?"

"I didn't; that's the trouble."

"Why don't you?"

"I can't find him."

Adna spoke up: "I'll go to Chicago and find him and get a divorce,
if I have to pound it out of him. You say he's a poet?"

Adna had the theory that poetry went with tatting and china-painting
as an athletic exercise. Kedzie had no reason to think differently.
She had whipped her own poet, scratched him and driven him away in
disorder. She told her people of this and of her inability to recall
him, and of his failure to answer the letter she had sent to Chicago.

Her father and mother grew incandescent with the strain between the
obstacle and the opportunity--the irresistible opportunity chained
to the immovable obstacle. They raged against the fiend who had
ruined Kedzie's life, met her on her pathway, gagged and bound her,
and haled her to his lair.

Poor young Gilfoyle would have been flattered at the importance they
gave him, but he would not have recognized himself or Kedzie.

According to his memory, he had married Kedzie because she was a
pitiful, heartbroken waif who had lost her job and thrown herself
on his mercy. He had married her because he adored her and he wanted
to protect her and love her under the hallowing shelter of matrimony.
He had given her his money and his love and his toil, and they had
not interested her. She had berated him, chucked him, taken up with
a fast millionaire; and when he returned to resume his place in her
heart she had greeted him with her finger-nails.

Thus, as usual in wars, each side had bitter grievances which the
other could neither acknowledge nor understand. Gilfoyle was as
bitter against Kedzie as she was against him.

And even while the three Thropps were wondering how they could summon
this vanquished monster out of the vasty deep of Chicago they could
have found him by putting their heads out of the window and shouting
his name. He was loitering opposite in the areaway of an empty
residence. He did not know that Kedzie's father and mother were
with her, any more than they knew that he was with them.




CHAPTER XXXIV

After a deal of vain abuse of Gilfoyle for abducting their child
and thwarting her golden opportunity, Adna asked at last, "What
does Mr. Dyckman think of all this?"

"You don't suppose I've told him I was married, do you?" Kedzie
stormed. "Do I look as loony as all that?"

"Oh!" said Adna.

"Why, he doesn't even know my name is Thropp, to say nothing of
Thropp-hyphen-Gilfoyle."

"Oh!" said Adna.

"Who does he think you are?" asked Mrs. Thropp.

"Anita Adair, the famous favorite of the screen," said Kedzie,
rather advertisingly.

"Hadn't you better tell him?" Adna ventured.

"I don't dast. He'd never speak to me again. He'd run like a rabbit
if he thought I was a grass widow."

Mrs. Thropp remonstrated: "I don't believe he'd ever give you up.
He must love you a heap if he wants to marry you."

"That's so," said Kedzie. "He's always begging me to name the day.
But I don't know what he'd think if I was to tell him I'd been
lying to him all this time. He thinks I'm an innocent little girl.
I just haven't got the face to tell him I'm an old married woman
with a mislaid husband."

"You mean to give him up, then?" Mrs. Thropp sighed.

Adna raged back: "Give up a billion-dollar man for a fool poet?
Not on your tintype!"

Kedzie gave her father an admiring look. They were getting on
sympathetic ground. They understood each other.

Adna was encouraged to say: "If I was you, Kedzie, I'd just lay
the facts before him. Maybe he could buy the feller off. You could
probably get him mighty cheap."

Mrs. Thropp habitually resented all her husband's arguments. She
scorned this proposal.

"Don't you do it, Kedzie. Just as you said, he'd most likely run
like a rabbit."

"Then what am I going to do?" Kedzie whimpered.

There was a long silence. Mrs. Thropp pondered bitterly. She was
the most moral of women. She had brought up her children with
all rigidity. She had abused them for the least dereliction. She
had upheld the grimmest standard of virtue, with "Don't!" for its
watchword. Of virtue as a warm-hearted, alert, eager, glowing spirit,
cultivating the best and most beautiful things in life, she had no
idea. Virtue was to her a critic, a satirist, a neighborhood gossip,
something scathing and ascetic. That delicate balance between failing
to mind one's own business and failing to respond to another's
need did not bother her--nor did that theory of motherhood which
instils courage, independence, originality, and enthusiasm for life,
and starts children precociously toward beauty, love, grace,
philanthropy, invention, art, glory.

She had the utmost contempt for girls who went right according to
their individualities, or went wrong for any reason soever. The least
indiscretions of her own daughters she visited with endless tirades.
Kedzie had escaped them for a long while. She had succeeded as far
as she had because she had escaped from the most dangerous of all
influences--a perniciously repressive mother. She would have been
scolded viciously now if it had not been for Dyckman's mighty
prestige.

The Dyckman millions in person were about to enter this room.
The Dyckman millions wanted Kedzie. If they got her it would be
a wonderful thing for a poor, hard-working girl who had had the
spunk to strike out for herself and make her own way without expense
to her father and mother. The Dyckman millions, furthermore, would
bring the millennium at once to the father and mother.

Mrs. Thropp, fresh from her village (yet not so very fresh--say,
rather, recent from sordid humility), sat dreaming of herself
as a Dyckman by marriage. She imagined herself and the great
Mrs. Dyckman in adjoining rocking-chairs, exchanging gossip and
recipes and anecdotes of their joint grandchildren-to-be. Just
to inhale the aroma of that future, that vision of herself as
Mr. Dyckman's mother-in-law, was like breathing in deeply of
laughing-gas; a skilful dentist could have extracted a molar
from her without attracting her attention. And in the vapor of
that stupendous temptation the devil actually did extract from her
her entire moral code without her noticing the difference.

If Kedzie had been married to Gilfoyle and besought in marriage by
another fellow of the same relative standard of income Mrs. Thropp
could have waxed as indignant as anybody. If Kedzie's new suitor
had earned as high as four thousand a year, which was a pile of
money in Nimrim, she would still have raged against the immorality
of tampering with the sacrament of marriage. She might have
withstood as much as twenty thousand a year for the sake of home
and religion. She abhorred divorce, as well as other people do
(especially divorcees).

But to resist a million dollars and all that went with it was
impossible. To resist a score of millions was twenty times
impossibler. She made up her mind that Dyckman should not escape
from this temporary alliance with the Thropps without paying at
least a handsome initiation-fee. Suddenly she set her jaw and
broke into the parley of her husband and their daughter:

"Well, I've made up my mind. Adna, you shut up awhile and get on
out this room. I'm going to have a few words with my girl."

Adna looked into the face of his wife and saw there that
red-and-white-striped expression which always puts a wise man
to flight. He was glad to be permitted to retreat. When he was
gone Mrs. Thropp beckoned Kedzie to sit by her on the _chaise
longue_. She gathered her child up as some adoring old buzzard
might cuddle her nestling and impart choice ideals of scavengery.

"Look here, honey: you listen to your mother what loves you and knows
what's best for you. You've struck out for yourself and you've won
the grandest chance any girl ever had. If you throw it away you'll
be slappin' Providence right in the face. The Lord would never have
put this op'tunity in your reach if He hadn't meant you to have it."

"What you talking about, momma?" said Kedzie.

"My father always used to say: 'Old Man Op'tunity is bald-headed
except for one long scalplock in the middle his forehead. Grab him
as he comes toward you, for there's nothing to lay holt on as he
goes by.'"

"What's all this talk about bald-heads?" Kedzie protested.

"Hush your mouth and listen to a woman that's older'n what you
are and knows more. Look at me! I've slaved all my life. I've been
a hard-workin', church-goin' woman, a good mother to a lot of
ungrateful children, a faithful, lovin' wife--and what have I got
for it? Look at me. Do you want to be like me when you get my age?
Do you?"

It was a hard question to answer politely, so Kedzie said nothing.
Mrs. Thropp went on:

"You got a chance to look like me and live hard and die poor, and
that's what'll happen if you stick by this low-life, good-for-nothing
dawg you married. Don't do it. Money's come your way. Grab it quick.
Hold on to it tight. Money's the one thing that counts. You take
my word for it. It don't matter much how you get it; the main thing
is Get it! People don't ask you How? but How Much? If you got enough
they don't care How."

"That's all right enough," said Kedzie, "but the main question with
me is How?"

"How is easy," said Mrs. Thropp, and her face seemed to turn yellow
as she lowered her voice. "This Mr. Dyckman is crazy about you. He
wants you. If he's willin' to marry you to get you, I guess he'll
be still more willin' to get you without marryin' you."

"Why, momma!"

It was just a whisper. Kedzie had lived through village perils and
city perils; she had been one of a band of dancers as scant of morals
as of clothes; she had drifted through all sorts of encounters with
all sorts of people; but she had never heard so terrible a thought
so terribly expressed. She flinched from her mother. Her mother saw
that shudder of retreat and grew harsher:

"You tell Mr. Dyckman about your husband, and you'll lose him. You
will--for sure! If you lose him, you lose the greatest chance a girl
ever had. Take him--and make him pay for you!--in advance. Do you
understand? You can't get much afterward. You can get a fortune if
you get your money first. Look at you, how pretty you are! He'd give
you a million if you asked him. Get your money; then tell him if you
want to; but don't lose this chance. Do you hear me?"

"Yes," Kedzie sighed. "Yes, momma."

"Promise me on your solemn honor!"

Kedzie giggled with sheer nervousness at the phrase. But she would
not promise.

The door-bell rang, and the maid admitted Jim Dyckman, who had
not paused to send his name up by the telephone. While he gave his
hat and stick to the maid and peeled off his gloves Kedzie was
whispering:

"It's Jim."

Mrs. Thropp struggled to her feet. "He mustn't find me here," she
said. "Don't tell him about us."

But before she could escape Dyckman was in the doorway, almost too
tall to walk through it, almost as tall as twenty million dollars.

To Mrs. Thropp he was as majestic as the Colossus of Rhodes would
have been. Like the Colossus of Rhodes, he was a gilded giant.




CHAPTER XXXV

Kedzie was paralyzed. Mrs. Thropp was inspired. Unity of purpose
guided her true. She had told her daughter to ignore Gilfoyle as
an unimportant detail. She certainly did not intend to substitute
a couple of crude parents as a new handicap.

No one knew Mrs. Thropp's cheapness of appearance better than she did.
A woman may grow shoddy and careless, but she rarely grows oblivious
of her uncomeliness. She will rather cherish it as the final cruelty
of circumstances. Mrs. Thropp was keenly alive to the effect it would
have on Dyckman if Kedzie introduced her and Adna as the encumbrances
on her beauty.

Adna, hearing the door-bell and Dyckman's entrance, returned to
the living-room from the bathroom, where he had taken refuge. He
stood in the hall now behind the puzzled Dyckman.

There was a dreadful silence for a moment. Jim spoke, shyly:

"Hello, Anita! How are you?"

"Hello, Jim!" Kedzie stammered. "This is--"

"I'm the janitor's wife," said Mrs. Thropp. "My husband had to come
up to see about the worter not running in the bathroom, and I came
along to see Miss--the young lady. She's been awful good to me.
Well, I'll be gettin' along. Good night, miss. Good night, sir."

To save herself, she could not think of Kedzie's screen name.
To save her daughter's future, she disowned her. She pushed past
Dyckman, and silencing the stupefied Adna with a glare, swept him
out through the dining-room into the kitchen.

It amazed Mrs. Thropp to find a kitchen so many flights up-stairs.
The ingenuity of the devices, the step-saving cupboard, the dry
ice-box with its coils of cold-air pipes, the gas-stove, the
electric appliances, were like wonderful new toys to her.

Adna was as comfortable as a cow in a hammock, and she would have
sent him away, but his hat was in the hall and she dared not go for
it. Besides, she wanted to wait long enough to learn the outcome
of Kedzie's adventure with Dyckman.

As soon as he was alone with Kedzie, Jim had taken her into his
arms. She blushed with an unwonted timidity in a new sense of the
forbiddenness of her presence there.

Her upward glance showed her that Jim had been in trouble, too. His
jaw had a mottled look, and one eyebrow was a trifle mashed.

"What on earth has happened to you?" she gasped.

"Oh, I had a little run-in with a fellow."

"What about?" said Kedzie.

"Nothing much."

"He must have hurt you terribly."

"Think so? Well, you ought to see him."

"What was it all about?"

"Oh, just a bit of an argument."

"Who was he?"

"Nobody you know."

"You mean it's none of my business?"

"I wouldn't put it that way, honey. I'd just rather not talk
about it."

Kedzie felt rebuffed and afraid. He had spent an evening away from
her and had reappeared with scars from a battle he would not describe.
She would have been still more terrified if she had known that he had
fought as the cavalier of Charity Coe Cheever. She would have been
somewhat reassured if she had known that Jim smarted less under the
bruises of Cheever's fists than under the rebuke he had had from
Charity for his interference in her marital crisis.

Jim was the more in need of Kedzie's devotion for being discarded
again by Charity. The warmth in Kedzie's greeting was due to her
fear of losing him. But he did not know that. He only knew that
she was exceedingly cordial to him, and it was his nature to repay
cordiality with usury.

He noted, however, that Kedzie's warmth had an element of anxiety.
He asked her what was worrying her, but she would not answer.

At length he made his usual remark. It had become a sort of standing
joke for him to say, "When do we marry?"

She always answered, "Give me a little more time." But to-night when
he laughed, "Well, just to get the subject out of the way, when do
we marry?" Kedzie did not make her regular answer. Her pretty face
was suddenly darkened with pain. She moaned: "Never, I guess. Never,
I'm afraid."

"What's on your mind, Anita?"

She hesitated, but when he repeated his query she took the plunge
and told him the truth.

Her mother had pleaded just a little too well. If Mrs. Thropp had
begged Kedzie to do the right thing for the right's sake Kedzie
would have felt the natural reaction daughters feel toward motherly
advice. But the entreaty to do evil that evil might come of it
aroused even more resistance, issuing as it did from maternal lips
that traditionally give only holy counsel. It had a more reforming
effect on Kedzie's crooked plans than all the exhortations of all
the preachers in the world could have had.

Kedzie turned to honesty because it seemed the less horrible of
two evils. She assumed the role of a little penitent, and made
Jim Dyckman a father confessor. She told her story as truthfully
as she could tell it or feel it. She was too sincere to be just.

She made herself the martyr that she felt herself to be. She wept
plentifully and prettily, with irresistible gulps and swallowings
of lumps and catches of breath, fetches of sobs, and dartings and
gleamings of pearls from her shining eyelids. Her handkerchief was
soon a little wad of wet lace, ridiculously pathetic; her lips were
blubbered. She wept on and on till she just had to blow her little
red nose. She blew it with exquisite candor, and it gave forth the
heartbreaking squawk of the first toy trumpet a child breaks of
a Christmas morning.

One radical difference between romance and realism is that in romance
the heroines weep from the eyelashes out; in realism, some of the
tears get into the nostrils. In real life it is reality that moves
our hearts, and Dyckman was convinced by Kedzie's realism.

She did not need to tell him of her humble and Western birth. He
had recognized her accent from the first, and forgiven it. He knew
a little of her history, because Charity Coe had sent him to the
studio to look her up, reminding him that she had been the little
dancer he pulled out of Mrs. Noxon's pool.

At length Kedzie revealed the horrible fact that her real name was
Kedzie Thropp. He laughed aloud. He was so tickled by her babyish
remorse that he made her say it again. He told her he loved it
twice as well as the stilted, stagy "Anita Adair."

"That's one of the reasons I wanted you to marry me," he said,
"so that I could change your horrible name."

"But I changed it myself first," Kedzie howled; and now the truth
came ripping. "The day after you pulled me out of the pool at Newport
I--I--married a fellow named Tommie Gilfoyle."

Dyckman's smile was swept from his face; his chuckle ended in a
groan. Kedzie's explanation was a little different from the one she
gave her parents. Unconsciously she tuned it to her audience. It
grew a trifle more literary.

"What could I do? I was alone in the world, without friends or money
or position. He happened to be at the railroad station. He saw how
frightened I was, and he had loved me for a long time. He begged me
to take mercy on him and on myself, and marry him. He offered me
his protection; he said I should be his wife in name only until I
learned to love him. And I was alone in the world, without friends
or money--but I told you that once, didn't I?"

Dyckman was thinking hard, aching hard. He mumbled, "What became
of him?"

"When he saw that I couldn't love him he took some money I had
left from my earnings and abandoned me. I had a desperate struggle
to get along, and then I got my chance in the moving pictures, and
I met you there--and--learned what love is--too late--too late!"

Dyckman broke in on her lyric grief, "What became of the man
you married?"

"He never came near me till awhile ago. He saw my pictures on the
screen and thought I must be making a big lot of money. He came here
and tried to sneak back into my good graces. He even tried to kiss
me, and I nearly tore his eyes out."

"Why?" Jim asked.

"Because I belong to nobody but you--at least, I did belong to
nobody but you. But now you won't want me any more. I don't blame
you for hating me. I hate myself. I've deceived you, and you'll
never believe me again, or love me, or anything."

She wept ardently, for she was appalled by the magnitude of her
deception, now that it stood exposed. She had no idea of the
magnitude of Dyckman's chivalry. She slipped to the floor and
laid her head on his knee.

It was Dyckman's nature to respond at once to any appeal to his
sympathy or his courtesy. Automatically his heart warmed toward
human distress. He felt a deeper interest in Kedzie than before,
because she threw herself on his mercy as never before. His hand
went out to her head and fell upon her hair with a kind of apostolic
benediction. He poured, as it were, an ointment of absolution and
acceptance upon her curls.

She felt in his very fingers so much reassurance that she was
encouraged to unburden herself altogether of her hoard of secrets.

"There's one more awful thing you'll never forgive me for, Jim. I
want to tell you that, and then you'll know all the worst of me. My
father and mother came to town to-day, and--and that was my mother
who said she was the janitor's wife."

"Why did she do that?" said Jim.

"I had been telling them how much I loved you, and poor dear mother
was afraid you might be scared away if you knew how poor my people
are."

"What kind of a ghastly snob do they take me for?" Jim growled.

"They don't know you as I do," said Kedzie; "but even I can't expect
you to forgive everything. I've lied to you about everything except
about loving you, and I was a long while telling you the truth about
that. But now you know all there is to know about me, and I wouldn't
blame you for despising me. Of course I don't expect you to want to
marry me any longer, so I'll give you back your beautiful engagement
ring."

With her arms across his knees, one of her delicate hands began to
draw from the other a gold circlet knobbed with diamonds.

"Don't do that," Jim said, taking her hands in his. "The engagement
stands."

"But how can it, darling?" said Kedzie. "You can't love me
any more."

"Of course I do, more and more."

"But you can never marry me, and surely you don't want--"

Suddenly she ran plump into the situation her mother had imagined
and encouraged. She blushed at the collision with it, and became
a very allegory of innocence confronted with abhorrent evil.

"Of course I don't," said Dyckman, divining exactly what she meant.
"I'll find this Gilfoyle and buy him up or beat him to a pulp."

Kedzie lifted her downcast eyes in gratitude for such a godlike
resolution. But before she could cry out in praise of it she cried
out in terror.

For right before her stood the long-lost Gilfoyle.




CHAPTER XXXVI

During his long wait this evening Gilfoyle had grown almost
uncontrollable with impatience to undertake the assault. His landlady
had warned him not to return to his room until he brought some cash
on account. He was for making the charge the moment he saw Jim
Dyckman enter the building, but Connery insisted on giving Dyckman
time to get forward with his courtship. They had seen the maid come
out of the servants' entrance and hurry up the street to the vain
tryst Connery had arranged with her to get her out of the way.

At length, when time had passed sufficiently, they had crossed to
the apartment-house and told the elevator-boy they were expected by
the tenants above. He took them up without question. They pretended
to ring the bell there, waited for the elevator to disappear, then
walked down a flight of steps and paused at the fatal sill.

Connery inserted the key stealthily into the lock, turned it, opened
the door in silence, and let Gilfoyle slip through. He followed and
closed the door without shock.

They heard Kedzie's murmurous tones and the rumble of Dyckman's
answer. Then Gilfoyle strode forward. He saw Kedzie coiled on the
floor with her elbows on Dyckman's knees. He caught her eye, and
her start of bewilderment held him spellbound a moment. Then he
cried:

"There you are! I've got you! You faithless little beast."

Dyckman rose to an amazing height, lifted Kedzie to her feet,
and answered:

"Who the devil are you, and what the devil do you want?"

"I'm the husband of that shameless woman; that's who I am," Gilfoyle
shrilled, a little cowed by Dyckman's stature.

"Oh, you are, are you!" said Dyckman. "Well, you're the very chap
I'm looking for. Come in, by all means."

Connery, seeing that the initiative was slipping from Gilfoyle's
flaccid hand, pushed forward with truculence.

"None of that, you big bluff! You needn't think you can put
anything over on me."

"And who are you?" said Dyckman.

"I'm Connery the detective, and I've got the goods on you."

He advanced on Dyckman, and Gilfoyle came with him. Gilfoyle took
courage from the puzzled confusion of Dyckman, and he poured forth
invectives.

"You think because you're rich you can go around breaking up homes
and decoying wives away, do you? Not that she isn't willing enough
to be decoyed! I wasn't good enough for her. She had to sell herself
for money and jewelry and a gay time! I ought to kill you both, and
maybe I will; but first I'm going to show you up in the newspapers."

"Oh, you are, are you!" was the best that Dyckman could improvise.

"Yes, he is," Connery roared. "I'm a newspaper man, and your name's
worth head-lines in every paper in the country. And I'll see that it
gets there, too. It will go on the wires to-night unless--"

"Unless what?"

"Unless you come across with--"

"Oh, that's it, is it!" said Dyckman. "Just a little old-fashioned
blackmail!"

He had tasted the joys of violence in his bout with Cheever, and now
he had recourse to it again. His long arms went out swiftly toward
the twain of his assailants. His big hands cupped their heads as if
they were melons, and he knocked their skulls together smartly.

He might have battered them to death, but he heard Kedzie's little
cry of horror, and forbore. He flung the heads from him, and the
bodies followed limply. Connery went to the floor, and Gilfoyle
sprawled across a chair. They were almost unconscious, their brains
reduced to swirling nebulae.

Kedzie thought for a moment that she and her love-affairs had brought
about a double murder. She saw herself becoming one of those little
women who appear with an almost periodic regularity in the annals of
crime, and whose red smiles drag now this, now that great family's
name into the mud and vomit of public nausea.

She would lose Jim Dyckman, after all, and ruin him in the losing.
She clung to his arm to check him in his work of devastation. He,
too, stood wondering at the amazing deed of his rebellious hands,
and wondering what the result would be.

He and Kedzie rejoiced at seeing the victims move. Connery began
to squirm on the floor and get to his wabbly knees, and Gilfoyle
writhed back to consciousness with wits a-flutter.

There was a silence of mutual attention for a while. Connery was
growling from all-fours like a surly dog:

"I'll get you for this--you'll see! You'll be sorry for this."

This restored Dyckman's temper to its throne. He seized Connery by
the scruff of his coat, jerked him to his feet, and snarled at him:

"Haven't you had enough, you little mucker? You threaten me or
Miss Adair again and I'll not leave enough of you to--to--"

He was not apt at phrases, but Connery felt metaphors enough in
the size of the fist before his nose. He put up his hands, palms
forward, in the ancient gesture of surrender. Then Gilfoyle turned
cry-baby and began to sob.

"You call her Miss Adair! But she's my wife. Mrs. Gilfoyle is what
she is, and you've taken her away from me. This is a rotten country,
and you rotten millionaires can do nearly anything you want to--but
not quite. You'll find that out. There are still a few courts and
a few newspapers you can't muzzle."

Dyckman advanced against him, but Gilfoyle merely clung to the back
of his chair, and his non-resistance was his best shelter. It was
impossible for Dyckman to strike him. Secure in his helplessness,
he took full advantage of the tyranny of impotence. He rose to his
feet and went on with his lachrymose philippic.

"You're going to pay for what you've done, and pay high!"

The one thing that restrained Dyckman from offering to buy him out
was that he demanded purchase. Like most rich people, Dyckman was
the everlasting target of prayers and threats. He could be generous
to an appeal, but a demand locked his heart.

He answered Gilfoyle's menace, bluntly, "I'll pay you when hell
freezes over, and not a cent before."

"Well, then, you stand from under," Gilfoyle squealed. "There's a
law in this State against home-wreckers like you, and I can send
you to the penitentiary for breaking it."

Dyckman's rage blackened again; he caught Gilfoyle by the shoulder
and roared: "You foul-mouthed, filthy-minded little sneak! You say
a word against your wife and I'll throw you out of the window.
She's too decent for you to understand. You get down on your knees
and ask her pardon."

He forced Gilfoyle to his knees, but he could not make him pray. And
Kedzie fell back from him. She was afraid to pose as a saint worthy
of genuflection. Connery re-entered the conflict with a sneer:

"Aw, tell it to the judge, Dyckman! Tell it to the judge! See how
good it listens to him. We'll tell him how we found you here; and
you tell him you were holding a prayer-meeting. You didn't want to
be disturbed, so you didn't have even a servant around--all alone
together at this hour."

Then a new, strange voice spoke in.

"Who said they were alone?"

The four turned to see Mrs. Thropp filling the hall doorway, and
Adna's head back of her shoulder. It was really a little too
melodramatic. The village lassie goes to the great city; her father
and mother arrive in all their bucolic innocence just in time to
save her from destruction.

Connery, whose climax she had spoiled, though she had probably saved
his bones, gasped, "Who the hell are you?"

"I'm this child's mother; that's who I am. And that's her father.
And what's more, we've been here all evening, and you'd better look
out how you swear at me or I'll sick Mr. Dyckman on you."

If there are gallery gods in heaven, and angels with a melodramatic
taste (as there must be, for how else could we have acquired it?),
they must have shaken the cloudy rafters with applause. Only one
touch was needed to perfect the scene, and that was for the
_First_ and _Second_ Villains to slink off, cursing
and muttering, "Foiled again!"

But these villains were not professionals, and they had not been
rehearsed. They were like childish actors in a juvenile production
at five pins per admission. An unexpected line threw them into
complete disorder.

Connery turned to Gilfoyle. "Did you ever lamp this old lady
before?"

Gilfoyle answered, stoutly enough, "I never laid eyes on her."

Connery was about to order Mrs. Thropp out of the room as an
impostor, but she would not be denied her retort.

"O' course he never laid eyes on me. If he had have he'd never tried
to pull the wool over that innocent baby's eyes; and if I'd ever laid
eyes on him I'd have run him out of the country before I'd ever have
let my child look at him a second time."

Connery made one last struggle: "What proof have you got that
you're her mother?"

"Ask my husband here."

"What good is his word in such a matter?"

Connery did not mean this as in any sense a reflection on Mrs.
Thropp's marital integrity, but she took it so. Now, in Nimrim
the question of fidelity is not dealt with lightly, at least in
repartee. Mrs. Thropp emitted a roar of scandalized virtue and
would have attacked the young men with her fists if her husband,
who should have attacked them in her stead, had not clung to her,
murmuring:

"Now, momma, don't get excited. You young fellers better vamoose
quick. I can't holt her very long."

So they vamosed and were much obliged for the opportunity, leaving
Kedzie to fling her arms about her mother with spontaneous filial
affection, and to present Dyckman to her with genuine pride.

Dyckman had been almost as frightened as Kedzie, He had been more
afraid of his own temper than of his assailants, but afraid enough
of their shadowy powers. Mrs. Thropp would have had to be far less
comely than she was to be unwelcome. She had the ultimate charm
of perfect timeliness. He greeted her with that deference he paid
to all women, and she adored him at once, independently of his
fortune.

Adna said that he had always been an admirer of the old Dyckman and
was glad to meet his boy, being as he was a railroad man himself,
in a small way. He rather gave the impression that he was at least
a third vice-president, but very modest about it.

Mrs. Thropp gleaned from the first words that Kedzie had gone
contrary to her advice and had told Dyckman the truth. She took
the credit calmly.

"I come on East to clear things up, and I advised my daughter to
tell you just the way things were--as I always say to my children,
use the truth and shame the devil."

Kedzie was too busy to notice the outrage. She was thanking Heaven
for her impulse to reveal the facts, realizing how appalling it
would have been if Gilfoyle had been the first to inform Dyckman.

They were all having a joyous family party when it suddenly came
over them that Gilfoyle had once more appeared and resubmerged.
But Dyckman said: "I'll find him for you, and I'll buy him. He'll
be cheap at any price."

He bade good night early and went to his own home, carrying a
backload of trouble. He was plainly in for it. Whatever happened,
he was the scapegoat-elect.




CHAPTER XXXVII

The villain in melodrama is as likely as not to be as decent a fellow
as any. When he slinks from the stage in his final hissed exit he
goes to his dressing-room, scours off his grease-paint, and probably
returns to his devoted family or seats himself before a bowl of
milk-and-crackers in his club.

Gilfoyle was as decent a fellow as ever villain was. Circumstances
and not himself cast him in an evil role, and as actors know, once
so established, it is almost impossible to return to heroic parts.
Gilfoyle could not even remove his grease-paint. He could not go
back to his dressing-room, for his landlady had told him that the
only key to her front door was cash. He had gone out to bring home
a millionaire, and he had achieved nothing but a headache and a
moral cataclysm.

He hardly knew how he escaped from the apartment-house. The dark
cool of the street brought him into the night of things. It came
upon him like a black fog what he had tried to do. The bitter
disgrace of a man who has been whipped in a fight was his, but
other disgraces were heaped upon it. For the first time he saw
himself as Kedzie saw him.

He had neglected his wife till she grew famous in spite of him.
He had gone back to her to share her bounty. When she repulsed
him he had entered into a conspiracy to spy on her. He had waited
impatiently for a rich man to compromise her, so that he could
surprise them in guilt and extort money from them.

He had not warned the girl of her danger from the other man or from
himself. He had not pleaded with her to be good, had not asked her
to come back to honeymoon again in poverty with him; he had preferred
to live on borrowed money and on unpaid board while he fooled with
verses and refused the manual tasks that waited everywhere about
the busy city. He might have cleaned the streets or earned a decent
living handling garbage in the city scows. But he had preferred to
speculate in blackmail and play the badger-game with his wife as
an unwitting accomplice. He had hated millionaires, and counted them
all criminals deserving spoliation, but he felt that he had sunk
lower than the millionaires.

The remembrance of Kedzie haunted him. She had been supremely
beautiful to-night, frightened into greater beauty than ever. She
was afraid of him who should have been her refuge, and she hid for
protection behind the man who should have seemed her enemy.

He recalled her as she was when he first loved her, the pretty
little candy-store clerk, the lissome, living marble in her Greek
tunic, the quaint, sweet girl who came to him in the Grand Central
Terminal, lugging her suit-case, the shy thing at the License
Bureau, the ineffably exquisite bride he had made his wife. He saw
her at the gas-stove and loved her very petulance and the pretty
way she banged the oven door and pouted at fate.

The lyrics he had written to her sang through his aching head. He
was wrung to anguish between the lover and the poet he had meant
to be, and the spurned and hated cur he had become. He stumbled
along the street at Connery's side, whispering to himself, while
his earliest verses to Kedzie ran in and out through his thoughts
like a catchy tune:

  Pretty maid, pretty maid, may I call you Anita?
  Your last name is sweet, but your first name is sweeter.

He recalled the sonnets he had begun which were to make them both
immortal. He regretted the spitefulness that had led him to write
in another name than hers because she had refused to support him.
He had been a viler beast than the cutpurse poet of old France,
without the lilies of verse that bloom pure white above the dunghill
of Villon's life.

Gilfoyle's soul went down into a hell of regret and wriggled in
the flames of self-condemnation. He grew maudlin with repentance
and clung to his friend Connery with odious garrulity. Connery was
disgusted with him, but he was afraid to leave him because he kept
sighing:

"I guess the river's the only place for me now."

At length Connery steered him into a saloon for medicine and bought
him a stiff bracer of whisky and vermouth. But it only threw Gilfoyle
into deeper befuddlement. He was like Charles Lamb, in that a
thimbleful of alcohol affected him as much as a tumbler another.
He wanted to tell his troubles to the barkeeper, and Connery had
to drag him away.

In the hope that a walk in the air might help to steady him, Connery
set out toward his own boarding-house. They started across Columbus
Avenue under the pillars of the Elevated tracks.

Habituated to the traffic customs, the New-Yorker crossing a street
looks to the left for traffic till he gets half-way across, then
looks to the right for traffic bound in the opposite direction.
Connery led Gilfoyle to the middle of the avenue, paused for a
south-bound street-car to go banging by them, darted back of it
and looked to the right for a north-bound car or motor. But a
taxicab trying to pass the south-bound car was shooting south
along the north-bound tracks.

Connery saw it barely in time to jump back. He yanked Gilfoyle's
arm, but Gilfoyle had plunged forward. He might have escaped if
Connery had let him go. But the cab struck him, hurled him in air
against an iron pillar, caught him on the rebound and ran him down.
Kedzie Thropp was a widow.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

Deaths from the wheeled torpedoes that shoot along the city streets
are too monotonously numerous to make a stir in the newspapers unless
the victims have some other claim on the public attention.

Gilfoyle had been writing advertisements of other people's wares, but
nobody was going to pay for the advertisement of him. The things that
he might have become were even more obscure than the things he was.
The pity of his taking-off would have had no more record than a few
lines of small type, but for one further accident.

The taxicab-driver whose reckless haste had sent him down the wrong
side of the street had been spurred on by the reckless haste of his
passenger. The pretty Mrs. Twyford had been for years encouraging
the reporters to emphasize her social altitude, and had seen that
they obtained her photographs at frequent intervals. But on this
night she had gone up-town upon one of the few affairs for which
she did not wish publicity. She had learned by telephone that her
husband had returned to New York unexpectedly, and she was intensely
impatient to be at home when he got there.

When her scudding taxicab solved all of Gilfoyle's earthly problems
in one fierce erasure she made such efforts to escape from the
instantly gathered crowd that she attracted the attention of the
policeman who happened to be at the next corner. He proceeded to
take the name and addresses of witnesses and principals, and he
detained her as an important accessory.

Connery was one of the news-men who had been indebted to Mrs. Twyford
for many a half-column of gossip, and he recognized her at once. He
was a reporter, first, last, and all the time, and he was very much
in need of something to sell.

He was greatly shattered by the annihilation of his friend, but
his instinctive journalism led him to control himself long enough
to call Mrs. Twyford by name and assure the policeman that she was
a lady of high degree who should not be bothered.

Neither the policeman nor Mrs. Twyford thanked him. They were
equally rude to him and to each other, Connery thought the incident
might interest the night city editor of his paper, and so he
telephoned a good story in to the office as soon as he had released
himself from the inquisition and had seen an ambulance carry poor
Gilfoyle away.

Mrs. Twyford reached home too late, and in such a state of nerves
that she made the most unconvincing replies to the cross-examination
that ensued. When she saw her name in the paper the next morning
her friends also began to make inquiries--and eventually to deny
that they were her friends or had ever been.

It was her name in the heavy type that caught the heavy eyes of
Jim Dyckman at breakfast the next morning. It was thus that he came
upon the fate of Thomas Gilfoyle, whose death had been the cause
of all this pother.

Before he could telephone Anita--or Kedzie, as he mentally corrected
himself--he was informed that a Mr. Connery was at the door, asking
for him. He nodded and went into the library, carrying the newspaper
with him.

Connery grinned sadly and mumbled: "I see you've seen it. I thought
you'd like to know about it."

"I should," said Dyckman. "Sit down."

Connery sat down and told of the accident and what led up to it.
He spoke in a lowered voice and kept his eye on the door. When he
had finished his story he said, "Now, of course this all comes out
very convenient for you, but I suppose you see how easy it would
be for me to tell what I know, and that mightn't be so convenient
for you."

"Are you beginning your blackmail again so early in the morning?"

"Cut out that kind of talk or there's nothing doing," said Connery.
"I can make a lot of trouble for you, and I can hush up a lot. Unless
I speak I don't suppose anybody else is going to peep about Miss
Adair being Mrs. Gilfoyle, and about Mr. Dyckman being interested
in his wife. If I do speak it would take a lot of explaining."

"I am not afraid of explaining to the whole world that Miss Adair
is a friend of mine and that her father and mother were present
when I called."

Connery met this with a smile. "But how often were they present
when you called?"

Dyckman grew belligerent again: "Do you want me to finish what
I began on you last night?"

"I'm in no hurry, thank you. You can outclass me in the ring, but
it wouldn't help you much to beat me up, would it?--or Miss Adair,
either. She's got some rights, hasn't she?"

"Has she any that you are capable of respecting?"

"Sure she has. I don't want to cause the little lady any
inconvenience. She and Tommie Gilfoyle didn't belong together,
anyway. She was through with him long ago, and the only thing
that saved his face was the fact that he's dead--poor fellow!

"But you see I've got to appear as a witness in the trial of
the taxicab-driver, who'll be held for manslaughter or something.
If I say that Gilfoyle and I had just come from a battle with you
and that he got the wits knocked out of him because he accused
you of making a mistress out of his wife--"

"Be careful!"

"The same to you, Mr. Dyckman."

Dyckman felt himself nettled. Kedzie's silence about the existence
of a husband had enmeshed him. He would not attempt to justify
himself. It would do no good to thresh about. The big gladiator
sat still waiting for the _retiarius_ to finish him. But
Connery's voice grew merciful. It was a luxury beyond price to
extend an alms to this plutocrat.

"What I'm getting at, Mr. Dyckman," he resumed, "is this: Tommie
owed some money to his landlady. He owed me some money that I could
use. He's got a mother and father up-State. He told me he'd never
told them about his marriage. They'll want him back, I suppose.
From what he's told me, it would be a real hardship for them to pay
the funeral expenses. You could pay all that, and you could even say
that he had a little money in the bank and send that along with him,
and never know the difference. But they would."

"I see," said Dyckman, very solemnly.

"You called me some rough names, Mr. Dyckman, and I guess I earned
'em. Looking things over the morning after, I'm not so stuck on
myself as I was, but you stack up pretty well. I like a man who can
use his hands in an argument. My name is Connery, you know. What you
did to me was a plenty, but it looks better to me now than it felt
last night.

"You know a reporter just gets naturally hungry to see a man face
a scandal in a manly way. If you had shown a yellow streak and tried
to buy your way out I would have taken your money and thought I was
doing a public service in getting it away from a quitter. But when
you cracked my bean against poor Gilfoyle's you made me see a lot
of things besides stars.

"There's nothing to be gained by keeping up this war. I want to put
it all out of sight for your sake and for Gilfoyle's mother's sake,
and for the sake of that pretty little Adair lady. I don't know what
she's been or done, but she's pretty and she's got a nice, spunky
mother.

"I'm a good newspaper man, Mr. Dyckman, and that means I've kept
quiet about even better stories than I've sprung. If I had a lot of
money now I'd add this story to the list and treat Gilfoyle's folks
right without giving you a look-in. But being dead-broke, I thought
maybe you'd like to see things done in a decent manner. It's going
to be hard enough for that old couple up-State to get Tommie back,
as they've got to, without taking any excess heartbreak up in the
baggage-car. Do you follow me?"

"I do," said Dyckman; and now he asked the "How much?" that he
had refused to speak the night before.

Connery did a little figuring with a pencil, and Dyckman thought
that some life-insurance in the mother's name would be a pleasant
thing to add. Then he doubled the total, wrote a check for it, and
said:

"There'll probably be something left over. I wish you'd keep it
as your--attorney-fee, Mr. Connery."

They shook hands as they parted.




CHAPTER XXXIX

Dyckman telephoned to Kedzie and asked if he could see her. She said
that he could, and dressed furiously while he made the distance to
her apartment.

She gleaned from his look and from the way he took her two hands
in his that he had serious news to bring her. She had not been
awake long enough to read the papers, and this was her first death.
She cried helplessly when she learned that her husband was gone away
with all her bitterness for his farewell. She remembered the best
of him, and he came back to her for a while as the poet who had
made her his muse--the only one she could telegraph to when she
returned to New York alone, her first and only husband.

She was afraid that she belittled herself in Dyckman's eyes when
she let slip the remorseful Wail, "I wish I had been kinder to
the poor boy!"

But she did not belittle herself in any such tendernesses of regret.
She endeared herself by her grief, her self-reproach, her childish
humility before the power of death. Her tears were beautiful in Jim's
sight. But it is the blessing and the shame of tears that they cure
the grief that causes them. At first they bleed and burn; then they
flow soft and cool. They cleanse and brighten the eyes and even wash
away the cinders from the funeral smoke.

Dyckman's heart was drawn out of him toward Kedzie and his arms
held her shaken body devotedly. But at length she ceased to weep,
and a last long sob became dangerously like a sigh of relief. She
smiled through the rain and apologized for weeping, when she should
have apologized for stopping weeping. Then Dyckman's love of her
seemed to withdraw backward into his heart. And his arms suddenly
wearied of clasping her.

When she had seemed hardly to know that he was there he felt
necessary and justified. When she took comfort in his arms and
held them about her he felt ashamed, revolted, profane.

Mrs. Thropp had wept a little in sympathy with Kedzie, and Adna
had looked amiably disconsolate; but by and by Mrs. Thropp was
murmuring:

"After all, perhaps it was for the best. The Lord's will be done!"

Dyckman shrank as if a blasphemy had been shouted. In a hideously
short time Mrs. Thropp was saying, briskly:

"Of course, honey, you've got no idea of puttin' on black for him."

"If I believed in mourning, I would," Kedzie answered without delay,
"but the true mourning is in the heart."

Dyckman felt an almost uncontrollable desire to get away before he
said something that might be true. He began to wonder what, after
all, poor Gilfoyle had experienced from this hard-hearted little
beauty. He saw that he was almost forgotten already. He thought,
"How fast they go, the dead!" That same Villon had said it centuries
before: "_Les morts vont vites_."

The Thropps settled down to a comfortable discussion of future plans.
One ledger had been finished. They would open a new one. Jim saw that
Gilfoyle's departure had been accepted as a Heaven-sent solution of
Kedzie's problems.

Abruptly it came to Dyckman that the solution of their problem
was the beginning of a whole volume of new problems for him. He
recalled that while he had become Kedzie's fiance in ignorance of
his predecessor, he had rashly promised to buy off Gilfoyle as soon
as he learned of him. But death had come in like a perfect waiter
and subtly removed from the banquet-table the thing that offended.
Nothing had happened, however, to release Dyckman from his
engagement. Gilfoyle's death ought not to have made a more
important difference than his life would have made, and yet it
made all the difference in the world to Dyckman's feelings.

He could not say this, however. He could not ask to be excused
from his compact. His heart and his brain cried out that they
did not want this merry little widow for their wife, but his lips
could not frame the words. During the long silences and the evasive
chatter that alternated he felt one idea in the air: "Why doesn't
Mr. Dyckman offer to go on with the marriage?" Yet he could not
make the offer. Nor could he make the counterclaim for a dissolving
of the betrothal.

He studied the Thropp trio and pictured the ridicule and the
hostility they would arouse among his family and friends--not
because they were poor and simple and lowly, but because they were
not honest and sweet and meek. The Dyckmans had poor relations and
friends in poverty and old peasant-folk whom they loved and admired
and were proud to know. But Dyckman felt that the elder Thropps
deserved to be rebuffed with snobbery because of their own snobbery.
Nevertheless, he was absolutely incapable of administering
discipline.

At last Mrs. Thropp grew restive, fearsome that the marriage might
not take place, and desperately fearful that she might be cheated
out of her visit in the spare room, at the home of the great Mrs.
Dyckman. She said, grimly:

"Well, we might as well understand one another, Mr. Dyckman. You
asked my daughter to marry you, didn't you?"

"Yes, Mrs. Thropp."

"Do you see anything in what's happened to prevent your getting
married?"

"No, Mrs. Thropp."

"Then I don't see much use wastin' time, do you? Life's too uncertain
to go postponin' happiness when it's right within your reach.
Kedzie's father and I ought to be gettin' back home, and I'd feel
a heap more comfortable if I could know my poor little chick was
safe in the care of a good man."

The possibility of getting Mr. and Mrs. Thropp out of town soon was
the one bright thought in Dyckman's mind. He felt compelled to say:

"Then let us have the ceremony, by all means. We shall have to wait
awhile, I suppose, for decency's sake."

"Decency!" said Mrs. Thropp, managerially. "My Kedzie hadn't lived
with the man for a long while. Nobody but us knows that she ever did
live with him. He'd abandoned her, and when he came back it was only
to try to get money out of her. I can't see that she has any call
to worry about decency's sake. He's done her harm enough. She can't
do him any good by keepin' you waitin'."

"Just as you think best, Mrs. Thropp," said Dyckman. He began to
smile in spite of himself. He was thinking how many mothers and
daughters had tried to get him to the altar, not because they loved
him, but because they loved his father's money and fame. Jim had
dodged them all and made a kind of sport of it. And now he was
cornered and captured by this old barbarian with her movie-beauty
daughter who was a widow and wouldn't wear weeds.

Mrs. Thropp saw Dyckman's smile, but did not dare to ask its origin.
She asked, instead:

"Would you be having a church wedding, do you think?"

"Indeed not," said Dyckman, with such incision that Mrs. Thropp
felt it best not to risk a debate.

"Just a quiet wedding, then?"

"As quiet as possible, if you don't mind."

Kedzie sat speechless through all this. She wished that Jim would
show more ardor for her, but she felt that he was doing fairly well
not to knock her parents' heads together the way he had her husband's
and his friend's. She was as eager as Jim to get rid of the elder
Thropps, but she wanted to make sure of the wedding, and her mother
was evidently to be trusted to bring it about. At length Jim spoke
in the tone of the condemned man who says, "Well, let's hurry up
and get the execution off our minds".

"I'll go and see a lawyer and make inquiries about how the marriage
can be done."

He started to say to Kedzie, "You ought to know."

She started to tell him about the Marriage License Bureau in the
Municipal Building. Both recaptured silence tactfully.

He kissed Kedzie, and he had a narrow escape from being kissed
by Mrs. Thropp.




THE THIRD BOOK

MRS. JIM DYCKMAN IS NOT SATISFIED




CHAPTER I

In the history of nations sometimes a paragraph serves for a certain
decade, while a volume is not enough for a certain day. It is so with
the history of persons.

In the thirty-six hours after he received Charity Coe's invitation to
call Jim Dyckman passed from being Charity's champion against her own
husband to being Kedzie's champion against hers. Charity rewarded his
chivalrous pommeling of Cheever by asking him never to come near her
again. Kedzie rewarded his punishment of Gilfoyle by arranging that
he should never leave her again.

It was Charity that he longed for, and Kedzie that he engaged to
marry.

In that period Peter Cheever had traveled a very short distance
in a journey he had postponed too long. Cheever had been hardly
conscious when they smuggled him at midnight from his club to his
own home. He had slept ill and achily. He was ashamed to face the
servants, and he wanted to murder his valet for being aware of
the master's defeat.

He did not know how ashamed the household retainers were of him and
of themselves. The valet and butler had earned good sums on occasions
by taking tips from Cheever on prize-fighters and jockeys. But they
felt betrayed now, and as disconsolate as the bottle-holders and
towel-flappers of a defeated pugilist.

They did not know who had whipped their master till the word came
from the Dyckman household that their master had come home glorious
from whipping the stuffing out of somebody. It was easy to put one
and one together and make two.

One of Cheever's worst embarrassments was the matter of Zada.
His battered head suffered tortures before it contrived a proper
lie for her. Then he called Zada up from his house and explained
that as he was leaving his club to fly to her, his car had skidded
into another, with the result that he had been knocked senseless
and cut up with flying glass; otherwise he was in perfect shape.
Unfortunately, he had been recognized and taken to his official
home instead of to the residence of his heart.

Zada was all for dashing to him at once; but he persuaded her that
that would be quite impossible. He was in no real danger in his own
house, and he would come back to his heart's one real first, last,
only, and onliest darling love just as soon as he could.

She subsided in wails of terror and loneliness. They touched his
heart so that he determined to end his effort at amphibian existence,
give up his legal establishment and legalize the illegal.

He wrote a note to Charity with much difficulty, since his knuckles
were sore and his pride was black and blue. His spoken language was
of the same tints. His written language was polite and formal.

It was a silly, tragic situation that led a husband to write
his wife a letter requesting an interview. Charity sent back
a scrawl--"_Yes, in fifteen minutes_."

Cheever spent a bad quarter of an hour dressing himself. His face
was too raw to endure a razor, and the surgeon had put little
cross-patches of adhesive tape on one of his cheek-bones and at
the edge of his mouth, where his lip had split as the tooth behind
it went overboard.

He yowled as he slipped his arms into a long bathrobe, and he struck
at the valet when the wretch suggested a little powder for one eye.

Charity had seen Cheever brought in at midnight and had looked
to it that he had every care. But now she came into his room with a
maidenly timidity. He did not know that she had rebuked Jim Dyckman
with uncharacteristic wrath for the attack. She did not tell Cheever
this, even though his first words to her demanded some such defense.

In the quarrels of lovers, or of those who have exchanged loves,
it makes little difference what the accusation is all about: the
thing that hurts is the fact of accusation.

Charity was so shamed at being stormed at by her husband that it
was a mere detail that he stormed at her with a charge that she
had goaded Jim Dyckman on to attack him.

Cheever had a favor to ask; so he put the charge more mildly now
than he had in his first bewildered rage. He accepted Charity's
silence as pleading guilty. So he went on:

"The fact that you chose Dyckman for your authorized thug and
bravo proves what I have thought for some time, that you love him
and he loves you. Now I have no desire to come between two such
turtle-doves, especially when one of them is one of those German
flying-machine _Taubes_ and goes around dropping dynamite-bombs
on me through club roofs.

"I'm not afraid of your little friend, and as soon as I get well
I'll get him; but I want it to be purely an exercise in the fistic
art, and not a public fluttering of family linen. So since you want
Jim Dyckman, take him, by all means, and let me bow myself out of
the trio.

"I'll give you a nice, quiet little divorce, and do the fair thing
in the alimony line, and then after a proper interval you and
little Jimmie can toddle over to the parson and then toddle off to
hell-and-gone, for all I care. How does that strike you, my dear?"

Charity pondered, and then she said, "And where do you toddle off
to?"

"Does that interest you?"

"Anything that concerns your welfare interests me."

"I see. Well, don't worry about me."

"There's no hurry, of course?"

"Not on my part," said Cheever. "But Dyckman must be growing
impatient, since he tries to murder me to save the lawyer's
fees."

"Well, if you're in no hurry, Peter, I'm not. I'll think it over
for a few months. It's bad weather for divorces now, anyway."

Cheever's heart churned in his breast. He knew that Zada could not
afford to wait. He should have married her long ago, and there was
no time to spare now. Charity's indifference frightened him. He did
not dream that through the dictagraph Charity had shared with him
Zada's annunciation of her approaching motherhood.

He turned and twisted in flesh and spirit, trying to persuade
Charity to proceed immediately for a divorce, but in vain.

Finally she ceased to laugh at him and demanded, sternly, "Why
don't you tell me the truth for once?"

He stared at her, and after a crisis of hesitation broke and
informed her of what she already knew. Now that he was at her feet,
Charity felt only pity for him, and even for Zada. She was sorrier
for them than for herself.

So she said: "All right, old man; let's divorce us. Will you or
shall I?"

"You'd better, of course; but you must not mention poor Zada."

"Oh, of course not!"

A brief and friendly discussion of ways and means followed, and
then Charity turned to go, saying:

"Well, I'll let you know when you're free. Are there any other
little chores I can do for you?"

"No, thanks. You're one damned good sport, and I'm infernally
sorry I--"

"Let's not begin on sorries. Good night!"

And such was unmarriage _a la mode_.




CHAPTER II

And now having felt sorry for everybody else, Charity began to
feel pleasantly sorry for Jim Dyckman. Her own rebuke of him for
assaulting Cheever had absolved him. In the retrospect, the attack
took on a knightliness of devotion. She recalled his lonely dogging
of her footsteps. If he had played the dog, after all, she loved
dogs. What was so faithful, trustworthy, and lovable as a dog?

But how was Charity to get word to Jim of her new heart? She could
not whistle him back. She could hardly go to him and apologize for
having been a good wife to a bad husband. And a married lady simply
must not say to a bachelor: "Pardon me a moment, while I divorce my
present consort. I'd like to wear your name for a change."

Charity might have been capable even of such a derring-do if she
had known that Jim Dyckman's bachelorhood was threatened with
immediate extinction by the Thropps. But she could not know. For,
however Jim's soul may have been mumbling, "Help, help!" he made no
audible sound. Unwilling brides may shriek for rescue, but unwilling
bridegrooms must not complain.

By a coincidence that was not strange Charity selected for her lawyer
Travers McNiven, the very man that Jim Dyckman selected. All three
had been friends since childhood. McNiven had been taken into the
famous partnership of Hamnett, Dawsey, Coggeshall, Thurlow & McNiven.

When Jim Dyckman telephoned him for an appointment he was told
to make it the next morning, as another client had pre-empted the
afternoon. Jim was glad enough of an excuse to postpone his marriage
by a day, never dreaming that Charity was the client who had
preempted McNiven.

McNiven wondered at the synchrony, but naturally mentioned neither
client to the other. His office was far down-town and far up in
the air. Its windows gave an amplitudinous vision of the Harbor
which Mr. Ernest Poole has made his own, but which was now a
vestibule to the hell of the European war. All the adjoining
land was choked far backward with a vast blockade of explosive
freight-trains waiting to be unloaded into the unheard-of multitude
of munition-ships waiting to run the gantlet of the German
submarines.

Charity had run that gantlet and was ready to run it again on another
errand of mercy, but first she must make sure that Zada's baby should
not enter the world before its mother entered wedlock.

After McNiven had proffered her a chair and she had exclaimed upon
the grandeur of the harborscape, she began:

"Sandy, I've come to see you about--"

"One moment!" McNiven broke in. "Before you speak I must as an
honest lawyer warn you against the step you contemplate."

"But you don't know what it is yet."

"I don't have to. I know that people come to lawyers only to get
out of scrapes or to get into scrapes dishonestly or unwisely.
Furthermore, every step that any human being contemplates is
a dangerous one and bound to lead to trouble."

"Oh, hush!" said Charity. "Am I supposed to pay you for that sort
of advice?"

"Being a friend, and a woman, and very rich, you will doubtless
never pay me at all. But let me warn you, Charity, that there is
nothing in life more dangerous than taking a step in any possible
direction--unless it is staying where you are."

"Oh, dear," sighed Charity, "you're worse than dear Doctor Mosely."

"Ah, you've been to the dear old doctor! And he's refused to help
you. When the Church denies a woman her way she comes to the devil.
You interest me. It's a divorce, then?"

"Yes."

McNiven remembered Jim Dyckman's ancient squiredom to Charity and
his recent telephony and he said to himself, "Aha!" But he said to
Charity, "Go on."

"Sandy, my husband and I have agreed to disagree."

"Then for Heaven's sake don't tell me about it!"

"But I've got to."

"But you mustn't! Say, rather, I have decided to divorce my husband."

"All right. Consider my first break unmade. Peter has asked me--I
mean, Peter has said that he will furnish me with the evidence on
one condition: that I shall not mention a certain person with whom
he has been living. He offers to provide me with any sort of evidence
you lawyers care to cook up."

McNiven stared at her and spoke with startling rigor. "Are you trying
to involve me in your own crimes?"

"Don't be silly. Peter says it is done all the time."

"Not in this office. Do you think I'd risk and deserve disbarment
even to oblige a friend?"

"You mean you won't help me, then?" Charity sighed, rising with
a forlorn sense of friendlessness.

McNiven growled: "Sit down! Of course I'll help you, but I don't
intend to let you drag me into ruin, and I won't help you get
a divorce that would be disallowed at the first peep of light."

"What can I do then? Peter said it could be managed quickly
and quietly."

"There are ways and ways, Charity Coe. The great curse of divorce
is the awful word 'collusion.' It can be avoided as other curses
can with a little attention to the language. Remember the old song,
'It's not so much the thing you say, as the nasty way you say it.'
That hound of a husband of yours wants to protect that creature
he has been flaunting before the world. So he offers to arrange
to be caught in a trap with another woman, and make you a present
of the evidence. Isn't that so?"

"I believe it is."

"Now the law says that 'any understanding preceding the act of
adultery' is collusion; it involves the committing of a crime. It
would be appalling for a nice little body like you to connive at
such a thing, wouldn't it?"

Charity turned pale. "I hadn't realized just what it meant."

"I thought not," said McNiven.

"He'll have to give me evidence of--of something that has already
happened, then, won't he?"

"The law calls that collusion also."

"Then what am I to do?"

"Couldn't you get evidence somehow without taking it from him?"

Charity was about to shake her head, but she nodded it violently.
She remembered the detectives she had engaged and the superabundant
evidence they had furnished her. She told McNiven about it and he
was delighted till she reminded him that she had promised not to
make use of Zada's name.

McNiven told her that she had no other recourse, and advised her
to see her husband. She said that it was hopeless and she expressed
a bitter opinion of the law. It seemed harsher than the Church,
especially harsh to those who did not flout its authority.

While Charity talked McNiven let his pipe-smoke trail out of the
window into the infinite where dreams fade from reality and often
from memory, and he thought, "If I can help Jim and Charity to get
together after all this blundering it will be a good job."

He was tempted to tell her that Jim was coming to see him, too, but
he was afraid that she knew it. If he had told her--but there goes
that eternal "if" again!




CHAPTER III

It is a fierce and searching test of a woman's mettle when first
she is confronted with temptation to rebel against the control of
her preacher. Men are used to it, and women must grow more and more
used to it as they advance into their long-deferred heritage.

Charity Coe Cheever was religious by every instinct. From childhood
she had thrilled to the creed and the music and the eloquence of
her Sundays. The beautiful industries of Christianity had engaged
her. She had been happy within the walls and had felt that her
piety gave her wings rather than chains.

And then she came abruptly to the end of her tether. She found
her soul revolted by a situation which her pastor commanded her
to accept as her lifelong portion. She found that to tolerate, and
by tolerating to collaborate in, the adultery of her husband and
his mistress was better religion than to free herself from odious
triplicity. She found that it was better religion to annul her
womanhood and remain childless, husbandless, and comfortless than
to claim the privileges, the freedoms, the renewing opportunities
the law allowed.

She came suddenly face to face with the terrifying fact that the
State offered her help and strength that the Church denied her.

She had reached indeed what the doleful balladists would call
"the parting of the ways," though no poet has yet chosen for his
heroine the distraught wretch who is driven to the bleak refuge
of divorce.

So long as it concerned only her own happiness Charity could
put away the choice. But the more she pondered that unless she
divorced her husband his mistress's baby would come into the world
with a hideous birthmark, the more she felt it her duty to flout
the Church. She shuddered to think of the future for that
baby, especially if it should be a girl. She felt curiously a
mother-obligation toward it. She blamed herself for her husband's
infidelity. She humbled herself and bowed her neck to the shame.

She left the Church and went to the law. And then she found that
the law had its own cruelties, its own fetters and walls and
loopholes and hypocrisies. She found that it is not even possible
to be a martyr and retain all one's dignity. One cannot even go
to the stake without some guile.

The wicked law which the Church abhorred had its own idea of
wickedness, and in the eyes of the law the agreement of a husband
and a wife to part was something loathsome. She expressed her
amazement to McNiven.

"It seems to me," she sighed, "if both husband and wife want
a divorce, they know best; and that fact ought to be sufficient
grounds in itself. And yet you tell me that if the law once gets
wind of the fact they've got to live together forever."

"That's it. They've got to live together whether they love together
or not--though of course you can get a separation very easily, on
almost any ground."

"But a separation is only a guarantee of--of infidelity,
I should think."

"Of course it is," said Lawyer McNiven.

"Then everything seems all wrong."

"Of course it is."

"Then why doesn't somebody correct it?"

"Who's going to bell the cat? Anybody who advocates divorce by mutual
consent is sure to be lynched more or less fatally, and especially
lynched by the very people who are making a mockery of matrimony in
their own lives.

"One marriage in twelve in the United States ends in divorce. You'll
not find anybody who dares to say that that is not a crying scandal.
Yet you and I know that home life in America is as pure and honorable
as in any other country. I'm an awful heathen, of course, but I'll
bet you I'm a true prophet when I say that divorce will increase
as the world goes on, instead of decreasing, and that in all the
countries where divorce is forbidden or restricted it will grow freer
and freer. Statistics prove it all over the globe."

To Charity Coe, the devout churchwoman, this picture was appalling.

"Oh, in Heaven's name, what will happen? The world will go all
to pieces!"

"That's what they said when men asked for the vote and for education,
when women asked for education and the vote; that's what they said
when people opposed the divine right of kings, and when they asked
for religious freedom; that's what they said when people opposed
slavery; that's what they said when people said that insane people
were not inhabited by devils and should be treated as invalids.
The trouble, Charity, is that a certain spirit has always been abroad
in the world fighting imaginary devils with the best intentions in
the world. And in all history there has never been anybody so
dangerous to human welfare as the zealot who wants to protect other
people from themselves and from the devils.

"The insane people were never inhabited by devils, and neither are
the sane people. Most men want one wife and most women want one
husband. Even in the polygamous countries you'll not find any more
real polygamy than you find in the countries with the strictest
marriage laws. Bluebeard was a Mohammedan, but Don Juan was a
Christian. Spain has no divorce on any grounds; neither has Italy.
Would you point to those countries as models of domestic purity?
Does any sane person dare say that home life in Spain is purer than
in the United States?

"I tell you, easy divorce goes right along with merciful laws,
public schools, clean prisons, free press, free speech."

Mrs. Cheever was a very good woman, and she abominated divorces.
She had very peculiar reasons for wanting one herself, as every one
has who wants one, but she felt her case to be so exceptional that
it proved the rule against divorces. She shrank a little from the
iconoclastic lawyer she had come to for aid, and reminded him of
the solemnity of the theme.

"Don't you believe in the sanctity of matrimony?"

"Just as much as I believe in the sanctity of personal liberty and
a contract and a debt and the obligation to vote and bear arms and
equality of opportunity and responsibility and--oh, a lot of other
sacred things--just as much and no more."

"But the Church calls marriage a sacrament."

"It does now, yes; but it didn't for over fifteen hundred years."

"What!"

"It's true. The trouble with you religious people is that you never
know the history of your own religion. And remember one more thing:
the marriage rules of the Christian Church are all founded on the
theories of men who never married. No wonder they found it easy
to lay down hard and fast rules. Remember another thing: the early
Church fathers, Saint Paul, Hieronymus, and thousands of others,
believed that marriage was only a little bit better than the worst
evil, and that womankind was hardly more than the devil's natural
weapon.

"It was not until the Church was eleven hundred and sixty-four years
old that Peter Lombard put marriage among the seven sacraments. And
marriage did not become an official matter of Church jurisdiction
till the Council of Trent in fifteen hundred and sixty-three. Think
of that! Marriage was not a sacrament for fifteen centuries, and
it has been one for less than four. And at that the Church could
only manage the problem by increasing the number of impediments to
marriage, which meant that it increased the number of excuses for
annulling it.

"The total number of marriages annulled would amaze you. History
is full of the most picturesque devices for granting divorce
without seeming to. Sometimes they would illegitimize two or
three generations in order to find a marriage within the forbidden
degrees.

"According to Saint Matthew, Christ allowed divorce on the ground
of adultery; according to Mark and Luke he made no such allowance.
New York State follows Saint Matthew. The Catholic Church follows
Luke and John. Old Martin Luther said that marriage was none of
the Church's business. And that's what I think."

"You don't believe in the religious ceremony?"

"I'm afraid I don't believe in religious ceremonies about anything.
I'm rather a heathen, you know--brought up in a good Presbyterian
Calvinistic atmosphere, but I've lost it all. I'll give three
cheers for virtue and the home as well as anybody; but my study
and my experience lead me to distrust preachers and preaching.

"Still, this is a free country, and married people have a right to
go to church if they want to, or to stay away. But I believe that
marriage must be a civil contract and that no preacher has a right
to denounce the State's prerogative, or try to belittle it. It is
strange, but true, that when the Church has ruled the State the
world has always groaned in corruption and cruelty.

"I believe that the law of New York is ridiculous in allowing only
one ground for divorce, and if the United States ever arranges
a uniform divorce law it will undoubtedly follow the policy of
the more liberal States. I believe, with Bernard Shaw and John
Galsworthy and a number of other good, great men, in cheap and
easy divorce, divorce within reach of the poor.

"As for morality, you have only to read the literature of the time
when there was no divorce to realize how little a safeguard it is
for the home. Boccaccio gives a social portrait of such a life,
and he is almost too indecent to read. Yet the picture he gives
is not half so terrible as Saint Catherine of Siena gives. They
had to cut that chapter out of her works."

"Oh, do you read her works, too?" said Charity, remembering her
experience with that flaming biography.

"I read a little of everybody. But everything I read and see confirms
my opinion that too much law is the curse of the world. Still, as I
say, I'm not a lawmaker. I'm a law-manipulator. I've been wondering
how long you would stand Cheever's scandalous behavior, and how long
you could be convinced that you were helping the morals of the world
by condoning and encouraging such immorality. Now that you've brought
your troubles to my shop I'm going to help you if I can. But I don't
want to get you or myself into the clutches of the law. You'll have
to take care of your Church relations as best you can. They may turn
you out, and you may roast on a gridiron hereafter, but that's your
business. Personally, I think the only wicked thing I've ever heard
of you doing was permitting your husband to board and lodge at your
house while he carried on with that--woman. A harem divided against
itself will not stand."

Charity was terrified by the man's profane view of sacred things,
and she was horrified to learn that she could only release herself
and Cheever from the shackles by a kind of trickery. She would have
to make her escape somewhat as she had seen Houdini break from his
ropes in the vaudevilles, by retiring behind dark curtains for
a while.

She felt guilty and craven whichever way she turned, and she imagined
the revulsion with which the good pastor would regard her. Yet she
was in a kind of mania to accept the scapegoat's burdens and be off
into the wilderness. She was resolved to undergo everything for the
sake of that poor child of Zada's hastening toward the world. She
thanked Heaven she had no child of her own to complicate her duty.

She understood why Cheever wanted to protect the name of the child's
mother from the courts, and she was baffled by the situation. The
lawyer, who was so flippant about the things the Church held so
sacred, was like a priest in his abhorrence of any tampering with
the letter of the law.

She left his office for a conference with Cheever. She found at home
that he had been telephoning to her. She called him up, and he came
over at once.

"I'm in a devil of a mess, Charity," he said. "My lawyer refuses
to help me give you evidence, and Zada--Miss L'Etoile--has developed
a peculiar streak of obstinacy. She is determined that no other woman
shall be named as the--er--co-respondent. She would rather be named
herself. She says everybody knows about our--er--relations, anyway;
and she doesn't care if they do."

Zada's character and her career had rendered her as contemptuous
of public disapproval as any zealot of a loftier cause than love.
There was a kind of barbaric insolence in her passion that Charity
could not help admiring a little. She felt a whit ashamed of her
own timidities and delicacies. The trouble with these proud defiers
of the public, however, is that they do not ask the consent of the
babies that are more or less implied in their superb amours.

Cheever was so distracted between the scruples of his lawyer and
Zada's lack of them that when Charity confessed how she had set
detectives on him and had secured a dictagraphic record of his
alliance with Zada he was overcome with gratitude.

So little a shift of circumstances makes all the difference between
a spy and a savior. The deed that he would once have cursed his wife
for stooping to, perhaps have beaten her for, was now an occasion
for overwhelming her with thanks.

He hurried away to his lawyer, and Charity telephoned McNiven for
another appointment the next afternoon. Jim Dyckman's appointment
was for the next morning.




CHAPTER IV

When Jim reached his office the next morning McNiven recommended
the view to him, gave him a chair, refused a cigar, lighted his pipe
instead, opened a drawer in his desk, put his feet in it, and leaned
far back in his swivel chair.

Jim began, "Well, you see, Sandy, it's like this--"

"One moment," McNiven broke in. "Before you speak I must as an
honest lawyer warn you against the step you contemplate."

"But, damn it, you don't know what it is yet."

"I don't have to. I know you, and I know that people don't come
to lawyers, as a rule, except to get out of a scrape dishonestly
or to get into one unwisely."

It was his office joke, and something more, a kind of formula for
squaring himself with his conscience, a phrase for warding off
the devil--as a beggar spits on the penny he accepts.

Having exorcised the demon, he said, "Go on, tell me: what's her
name and how much does she want for silence?"

"How much do you want for silence?" Jim growled.

"Shoot!"

McNiven was startled and grieved when he learned that Jim was not
making ready to marry Charity Coe, but some one else. Jim told
him as much as he thought necessary, and McNiven guessed the rest.
He groaned: "It seems impossible to surround marriage with such
difficulties that people won't break in and out. I've got a friend
of yours trying to bust a home as quietly as you're trying to
build one."

Of course, he did not mention Charity's name. He tried fervently
to convince Jim that he ought not to marry Kedzie, but, failing to
persuade him from the perils of matrimony, he did his best to help
him to a decent secrecy. His best was the program Jim and Kedzie
followed.

They motored over to the village of Jolicoeur in New Jersey. There
a local attorney, a friend of McNiven's, met them and vouched for
them before the town clerk, who made out the license. He asked
Kedzie if she had been married before, and she was so young and
pretty and so plainly a girl that he laughed when he asked the
question. And for answer Kedzie just laughed, too. He wrote down
that she had never been married before. Kedzie had not really lied,
and they can't arrest a person, surely, for just laughing. Not that
she did not believe in the motto which Blanche Bates used to read
so convincingly in "The Darling of the Gods": "It is better to lie
a little than to be unhappy much."

Jim was shocked at the situation, but he could hardly be so ungallant
as to call his fiancee a liar at such a time. Besides, he had heard
that the law is interested in people's persons and not their names,
and he was marrying Kedzie personally.

When the license was made out the lawyer whispered to the town clerk
that it would be made worth his while to suppress the news for thirty
days or more, and the clerk winked and grinned. Business was slow
in matrimony, and he needed any little tips.

Now that they were licensed, Jim and Kedzie, being non-residents of
New Jersey, must wait twenty-four hours before they could be married.
They motored back to New York and went to the theater to kill the
evening. The next afternoon Jim called for Kedzie, and they motored
again to Jolicoeur for the ceremony. Mr. and Mrs. Thropp went along
as witnesses and to make sure.

The lawyer had found a starveling parson in Jolicoeur who asked
the fatal questions and pronounced the twain man and wife, adding
the warning, "Whom God hath joined, let no man put asunder." Jim
Dyckman was so befuddled that he heard it, "Let no man join whom God
hath put asunder." But he paid the preacher well and added a large
sum for the church on condition that the news of the marriage be
kept out of the public records till the last legal moment.

Dyckman had tried to do the honorable thing by Kedzie. He was
certainly generous, for a man can hardly give a woman more than
himself and all he has. Dyckman, however, had been ashamed of
a mental reservation or two. He could not repress a sneaking
feeling that he had been less the kidnapper than the napped kid
in this elopement. If anybody were to be arrested for abduction,
it would not be he.

He reviled himself for confessing this to himself, and his sympathies
went out to Kedzie because the poor child had to be yoked with
a reluctant mate. A bridegroom ought to bring to his bride, above
all things else, an eager heart. And that Jim could not bring.

He had been in his time a man and had sowed his measure of wild oats
--more than a poor man could, less than a rich man might, far less
than his unusual opportunities and the greedy throngs of temptresses
encouraged. But he had taken Kedzie seriously, never dreaming how
large a part ambition played in her devotion to him. He had been
good to her and with her. The marriage ceremony had solemnized him
further.

He had made a try at secrecy, because he felt shy about the affair.
He knew that his name would lead the newspapers to haze him, as
the rustic neighbors deride a rural couple with a noisy "chivaree."
He dreaded the head-lines, as a kind of invasion of the bridal
chamber.

In any case he had always hated flamboyant weddings with crowds and
splendor. He did not believe that a marriage should be circused.

And thus at last he and Kedzie were united into one soul and one
flesh, for better, for worse, etc., etc. Then they sped away to
the remotest pleasant hotel to be found in darkest Jersey.

Jim registered under his own name, but blushed more hotly than if
he had been engaged in an escapade. He could, perhaps, have taken
Kedzie so with less regret than under the blessing of the clergy.
For now he felt that he owed to her the all-hallowing grace of
that utter love which was something he could not bestow.

She was the first wife he had ever had, and he wished a devoutness
in that consummation. Lacking the sanctifying ardor, he was
remorseful rather than triumphant, feeling himself more of a
brute than even a bridegroom usually feels.

Kedzie did not seem to miss any perfection in his devotion, but
he imputed that more to her innocent kindliness than to any grace
of his own. The more he studied her the more he wondered why he
did not love her more. She was tremendously exquisite, ferociously
delicate, and almighty pretty. She was altogether too delectable,
too cunningly wrought and fragile, for a hulking Titan like him.

He was positively afraid of her, and greatly amazed to see that
she was not at all afraid of him. The moment the parson had done
his worst a new Kedzie had appeared. She took command of everything
instantly: ordered the parson about, shipped her mother and father
back to town as if they were bothersome children, gave directions
to Jim's chauffeur in a way that taught him who was to be who
thenceforward, and made demands upon the hotel clerk in a tone
that was more convincing of her wifehood than a marriage license
could have been.

The quality missing in Kedzie was the sense of terror and meekness
expectable in brides. Her sole distress was, to Jim's amazement,
the obscurity and solitude of their retreat. Kedzie was rapturous,
but she had not the slightest desire to hide it from the world.
She was Mrs. Jim Dyckman, and she didn't care who knew it.

Poor Kedzie had her own sorrows to mar her triumph. She was being
driven to believe that the world was as badly managed as the
Hyperfilm Studio. Providence seemed to provide tribulations for her
like a scenario editor pursuing a movie heroine. The second reel had
begun well, the rich but honest lover putting the poor but dishonest
husband to flight. And now Honeymoon Number Two! She had dreamed
of a gorgeous church ceremony with two pipe-organs, and an enlarged
cast of clergymen, and wedding guests composed of real millionaires
instead of movie "extras." But lo and behold, her adorer whisks her
off to a little town in New Jersey and the great treaty is sealed
in the shoddy parlor of a village parsonage! Gilfoyle's Municipal
Building was a cathedral compared to this.

Then with never a white ribbon fluttering, not an old shoe or
a grain of rice hurtling, the limousine of love rolled away to
a neglected roadhouse. It was attractive enough as a roadhouse,
but it was wretched as an imitation paradise.

In the face of this outrage everything else was a detail, a minor
humiliation. There was no parrot on an area fire-escape to mock her
next morning, but there was a still earlier rooster to banish sleep
and parody her triumph. She slipped out of bed and went barefoot
to the window-seat and gazed out into a garden.

She made a picture there that Ferriday would have loved in
a "close-up." Her hair was tumbling down upon and around her
shoulders, and her silken nightgown shimmered blissfully about her,
sketching her contours in iridescent lines. She gazed, through an
Elizabethan of small panes, into a garden where sunrise bloomed
rosily in petals of light. She was the prettiest thing in the
pretty picture; yet she was pouting at Fate--Fate, the old scenario
writer who never could seem to bring off a happy ending.

Jim Dyckman, waking, saw her there and rubbed his eyes. Then he
remembered. He pondered her and saw a tear or two slip out of her
eyes, run along her cheek and pitch off into the tiny ravine of her
bosom. He felt that he was a contemptible fiend who had committed
a lynchable crime upon a tender and helpless victim. He closed his
eyes in remorse, pretending to sleep, tormented like the repentant
purchaser of a "white slave"--or rather a pink slave.

They breakfasted early and prettily. Kedzie was radiant now. She
usually was when she was dealing in futures. They took up the
question of their future residence. Jim proposed all the honeymoon
haunts. Europe was out of the question, so he suggested Bermuda,
Jamaica, California, Atlantic City, North Carolina, the Adirondacks.
But Kedzie wanted to get back to New York.

This pained and bewildered him at first, because he felt that wedded
rapture should hide itself awhile in its own lovely loneliness.
Besides, his appearance in New York with a wife would involve him
in endless explanations--and there would be reporters to see, and
society editors and photographers, and his family and all his
friends.

But those were just what Kedzie wanted. And at last she told him so.

"You act as if you were ashamed to be seen with me," she cried out.

The only answering argument to this was to take her back to town
at once. The question of how and where they were to live was
important. They had not settled it in the flurry of their hasty
secret marriage.

Jim supposed that a hotel would be necessary till they found a house.
He loathed the thought of a hotel, but a suitable furnished house
might not be in the market at the moment. He suggested an apartment.

This reminded Kedzie of how Gilfoyle had sent her out on a flat-hunt.
She would have more money now, but there would doubtless be something
the matter with every place. The most urgent thing was to get out of
New Jersey. They could discuss residences in the car.

And they did discuss them. Building a new house would take years.
Buying a ready-made house and furnishing it would take days, perhaps
weeks. Kedzie could not choose which one of the big hotels she most
wanted to camp in. Each had its qualities and their defects.

When they were on the ferry crossing the river she had not yet made
up her mind. Jim had no mind to make up. He was reduced to a mere
waiter on her orders. He laughed at himself. This morning at daybreak
he had been reproaching himself for being a vicious gorilla who had
carried off a little girl; now he was realizing that the little girl
had carried him off and was making a monkey of him.

Kedzie's mental disarray was the overwhelming influence of infinite
money. For the first time in her life she could disregard price-marks
entirely. Curiously, that took away half the fun of the thing. It
seemed practically impossible for her to be extravagant. She would
learn before long that there are countless things that plutocrats
cannot afford, that they also must deny themselves much, feel shabby,
and envy their neighbors. For the present she realized only that she
had oodles of money to sprinkle.

But it takes training to spend money, and Kedzie was now unpractised.
Her wisher was so undeveloped that she could only wish for things
available to people of moderate affluence. She could not wish for
a yacht, because Jim had a yacht. She could not wish for a balloon
because she would not go up in it. She could wish for a house, but
she could not walk into it without delay. She could not live in two
hotels at once. Jewelry she could use in quantities, but even at that
she had only so much surface area to hang it on. In fact, when she
came right face to face with facts, what was there worth wishing for?
What was the use of being so dog-on rich, anyway?

And there she hung on the door-sill of her new life like a child
catching sight of a loaded Christmas tree and palsied with inability
to decide which toy to grab first, horrified to realize that he
cannot suck the orange and blow the trumpet at the same time.

When they reached the New York side of the Hudson the car rolled off
the boat into the ferry-house and into the street, and when Jim said
again, "Well, where do you want to go?" she had to sigh.

"Oh, Heavens! let's go home to my old apartment and talk it over."
She gave the address to the chauffeur, and Jim smiled grimly. It
gave him a little cynical amusement to act as passenger.

On the way up-town Kedzie realized that she was hungry and that
here would be no food in her apartment. They turned to Sherry's.
Kedzie left Jim and went into the dressing-room to smooth her hair
after the motor flight.

And now, just too late, Charity Coe Cheever happened to arrive as
the guest of Mrs. Duane. The sight of Jim alone brought a flush of
hope to Charity's eyes. She greeted him with a breeziness she had
hardly known since she was a girl. There was nothing about his
appearance to indicate that he had just come across from New Jersey,
where he had been made the husband of Mrs. Kedzie Thropp Gilfoyle.

Seeing Charity so unusually bright, Jim said, "What's happened to
you, Charity, that you look so gay and free?"

"That's what I am."

"What?"

"Gay and free. Can you keep a secret?"

"Yes."

"I'm getting divorced."

"My Lord, no!"

"Yes, my lord."

"Oh, God, and me just married!"

Charity looked for an instant as if an arrow had flashed into her
heart and struck her dead. Then with relentless courage she plucked
out the steel and let the blood gush while she smiled.

"Congratulations, old boy. Who's the lucky lady?"

"It's the little girl I yanked out of Mrs. Noxon's pool."

"The one I asked you to look out for?"

"Yes."

"Well, isn't that fine! She was very pretty. I hope you'll be ever
so happy."

"Thanks, Charity--thank you. Mighty nice of you! Of course, you
know--er--Well, here she is." He beckoned to Kedzie, who came
forward. "Mrs. Cheever, my wife. But you've met, haven't you?"

"Oh yes, indeed," said Charity Coe, with an effusion of cordiality
that roused Kedzie's suspicions more than her gratitude. The first
woman she met was already trying to get into her good graces! Charity
Coe went on, with a little difficulty:

"But Mrs. Dyckman doesn't remember me. I met you at Mrs. Noxon's."

"Oh yes," said Kedzie, and a slow, heavy crimson darkened her face
like a stream of treacle.

The first woman she met was reminding her of the time she was a
poor young dancer with neither clothes nor money. It was outrageous
to have this flung in her face at the very gate of Eden.

She was extremely cold to Charity Coe, and Charity saw it. Jim
Dyckman died the death at finding Kedzie so cruel to the one who
had befriended her. But he could not rebuke his wife, even before
his lost love. So he said nothing.

Charity caught the heartsick, hangdog look in his eyes, and she
forbore to slice Kedzie up with sarcasm. She bade her a most
gracious farewell and moved on.

Kedzie stared after her and her beautiful gown, and said: "Say, Jim,
who were the Coes, anyway? Did they make their money in trade?"

Jim said that he would be divinely condemned, or words to that
effect.




CHAPTER V

And now Kedzie Thropp was satisfied at last--at least for the time
being. She was a plump kitten, replete and purr-full, and the world
was her catnip-ball.

There was no visible horizon to her wealth. Her name was one of the
oldest, richest, noblest in the republic. She was a Dyckman now,
double-riveted to the name with a civil license and a religious
certificate. Tommie Gilfoyle had politely died, and like an obliging
rat had died outside the premises. Hardly anybody knew that she had
married him, and nobody who knew was going to tell.

Kedzie forgot Charity in the joy of ordering a millionaire's
luncheon. This was not easy. She was never a glutton for food;
excitement dimmed what appetite she had, and her husband, as she
knew, hated made dishes with complex sauces.

Kedzie was baffled by the futility of commanding a lot of things
she could not eat, just for the fun of making a large bill. She was
like the traditional prospector who struck it rich and, hastening
to civilization, could think of nothing to order but "forty dollars'
worth of pork and beans."

Kedzie had to satisfy her plutocratic pride by bossing the waiter
about, by complaining that the oysters were not chilled and the
sherry was. She sent back the salad for redressing and insisted
that the meat was from cold storage. She was no longer the poor
girl afraid of the waiter.

Kedzie was having a good time, but she regretted that her
wedding-ring was so small. She felt that wives ought to wear some
special kind of plume, the price of the feather varying with the
bank account. Kedzie would have had to carry an umbrella of plumes.

Still, she did pretty well on her exit. She went out like a million
dollars. But her haughtiness fell from her when she reached home
and found Mr. and Mrs. Thropp comfortably installed there, saving
hotel bills.

Charity Coe had gone out feeling a million years old. She left
the presence of Kedzie in a mood of tragic laughter. She was
in one of those contemptible, ridiculous plights in which good
people frequently find themselves as a result of kindliness and
self-sacrifice.

For well-meant actions are as often and as heavily punished in
this world as ill-meant--if indeed the word _punishment_ has
any respectability left. It is certainly obsolescent.

Many great good men, such as Brand Whitlock, the saint of Belgium,
had been saying that the whole idea of human punishment of human
beings is false, cruel, and futile, that it has never accomplished
anything worth while for either victim or inflictor. They place it
among the ugly follies, the bloody superstitions that mankind has
clung to with a fanaticism impervious to experience. They would
change the prisons from hells to schools and hospitals.

Even the doctrine of a hell beyond the grave is rather neglected
now, except by such sulphuric press agents as Mr. Sunday. But in
this world we cannot sanely allege that vice is punished and virtue
rewarded until we know better what virtue is and what is vice. All
that it is safe to say is that punishment is a something unpleasant
and reward a something pleasant that follows a deed--merely follows
in point of time, not in proof of judgment.

So the mockery of Charity's good works was neither a punishment
nor a ridicule. It was a coincidence, but a sad one. Charity had
befriended Kedzie without making a friend thereby; she had lost,
indeed, her good friend Jim. Charity's affection for Jim would make
her suspect in Kedzie's eyes, and Kedzie's gratitude had evidently
already cut its sharper-than-a-serpent's wisdom tooth.

Charity had been patient with her husband and had lost him. She
had asked the Church for her freedom and had been threatened with
exile. Then her husband had demanded his freedom and forced her
to choose between blackening her own soul with the brand "divorcee"
or blackening her husband's mistress's baby's soul with the brand
"illegitimate."

She had preferred to take the shame upon herself. But who would give
her credit? She knew how false was the phrase that old Ovid uttered
but could not comfort even himself with, "The mind conscious of
rectitude laughs at the lies of gossip." No woman can afford such
security.

Charity had such a self-guying meekness, indeed, that instead of
clothing herself in the robes of martyrdom she ridiculed herself
because of one thing: In a pigeonhole of her brain a little
back-thought had lurked, a dim hope that if she gave her husband
the divorce he implored she might be free to remold her shattered
life nearer to her heart's desire--with Jim Dyckman. Her husband,
indeed, had taunted her with that intention, and now she had no
sooner launched her good name down the slippery ways of divorce
than she found Jim Dyckman married and learned that her premature
and unwomanly hopes for him were ludicrously thwarted!

She went to McNiven's office with a dark life ahead of her. She had
no desire left except to disentangle herself from Peter Cheever's
life as quietly and swiftly as possible. She told McNiven this and
said:

"How quickly can the ghastly job be finished?"

"Theoretically it could be done in a day, but practically it takes
a little longer. For we must avoid the look of collusion like the
plague. So we'll allow, say, a week. If we're lucky with our judges,
it may take less."

Then he outlined the steps to be taken. An unusual chain of
circumstances enabled him to carry them out with unexpected neatness
and despatch, so that the case became a very model of how gracefully
the rigid laws of divorce could be manipulated in the Year of Our
Lord 1916 and of the Founding of the Republic 140.

It may be interesting to outline the procedure as a social document
in chicanery, or social surgery, as one wills to call it.

McNiven first laid under Charity's eyes a summons and complaint
against Peter Cheever. She glanced over it and found it true except
that Zada L'Etoile was not named; Cheever's alleged income was vastly
larger than she imagined, and her claim for alimony was exorbitant.

Her first question was: "Who is this unknown woman going by the name
of Sarah Tishler? I thought Miss L'Etoile was to be the only woman
mentioned."

McNiven explained: "L'Etoile is her stage name. She doesn't know
her real name herself, for she was taken from the foundling-asylum
as a child by a family named Tishler. We have taken advantage of
that disadvantage."

Charity bowed to this, but she protested the income credited to
her husband.

"Peter doesn't earn half as much as that."

"How do you know what he earns?" said McNiven.

"He's told me often enough."

"Do you believe all he told you?"

"No; but, anyway, I don't want any of his old alimony. I have money
enough of my own."

"That can be arranged later, but if you don't swear to this as it
lies you can't have your divorce."

"Why not?"

"Because there has to be a contest, and we've got to give his lawyer
something to fight."

Charity yielded wearily. She fought against making an affidavit to
the truth of the complaint, but when NcNiven said, "No affidavit,
no divorce," she took her oath before the clerk who was called in
as a notary public.

"Now you may go home," said McNiven; and Charity stole out, feeling
herself a perjured criminal. Then the divorce-mill began to grind.

A process-server from McNiven's office went across Broadway to
Tessier's office, where Cheever was waiting. He handed the papers
to Cheever, who handed them to Tessier, who hastily dictated an
answer denying the adultery, the alleged income, and the propriety
of the alimony claimed.

Tessier and Cheever visited McNiven in his office and served him
with this answer. The two lawyers then dictated an agreement to
a reference, Tessier adding a statement that he considered his
client equipped with a good defense and that he intended to oppose
the suit in good faith.

Their clerks took this to the County Court House in City Hall Square
and filed it with the clerk of the Supreme Court, Special Term,
Part II.

Justice Cardwell, before leaving his chambers, read the papers and
issued an order naming as referee the lawyer Henry Firth.

Here for a moment the veil of secrecy was rent, for this order
could not be suppressed. It was published in _The Law Journal_
the next morning, and the eager reporters reading therein that
Mrs. Peter Cheever was suing her husband for a divorce on statutory
grounds, dashed to the records and learned that she accused him
of undue intimacy with an unknown woman going by the name of Sarah
Tishler.

By selecting an obscure town this publicity might have been deferred,
but it would have meant delay in the case as well.

A flock of reporters sped like hawks for Charity's home, where they
were denied admittance; for Cheever's office, where they were told
that he was out of town; and even for Zada L'Etoile's apartment,
where they were informed that she had left the State, as indeed she
had. Sarah Tishler had a right, being named as co-respondent, to
enter the case and defend her name, but she waived the privilege.

The evening papers made what they could of the sensation, but nobody
mentioned Zada, for nobody knew that fate had tried to conceal her
by naming her Tishler, and nobody quite dared to mention her without
legal sanction.

On the next day Lawyer Firth held court in his office. Reporters were
excluded, and the lawyers and detectives and Cheever and Charity, who
had to be present, declined to answer any of the questions rained
upon them in the corridors and the elevators.

Mr. Firth was empowered to swear in witnesses and take testimony.
The evidence of the detectives, corroborated by the evidence of
a hall-boy and a janitor and by proof of the installation of the
dictagraph, seemed conclusive to Mr. Firth.

Cheever denied that he had committed the alleged adultery and gave
proof that his income was not as stated. Attorney Tessier evaded
the evidence of adultery, but fought hard against the evidence of
prosperity. Referee Firth made his report finding the defendant
guilty of the statutory offense, and ordered a decree of divorce,
with a diminished alimony. He appended a transcript of the evidence
and filed it with the Clerk of the County of New York. The statutory
fee for a referee was ten dollars a day, but the lawyers had quietly
agreed on the payment of a thousand dollars for expediting the case.
With this recompense Mr. Firth ended his duties in the matter.

McNiven prepared a motion to confirm the report of the referee and
took it to Tessier, who accepted service for his client. McNiven then
went to the county clerk and filed a notice that the motion would be
called up the next morning. The clerk put it on the calendar of
Special Term, Part III.

The next morning McNiven appeared before Justice Palfrey, submitted
his motion, and asked for an interlocutory decree. He left his paper
with the clerk. During the afternoon Justice Palfrey looked over
the referee's report and decided to grant McNiven's motion. In view
of the prominence of the contestants and since he had heard of
Charity's good works, and felt sure that she had suffered enough
in the wreck of her home, he ordered the evidence sealed. This
harmed nobody but the hungry reporters and the gossip-appetite
of the public.

McNiven was waiting in the office of the clerk, and as soon as
he learned that the judge had granted the motion he submitted the
formal orders to be signed. The clerk entered the interlocutory
decree. And now the marriage was ended except for three months of
grace.

The first day after that period had passed McNiven submitted an
affidavit that there had been no change in the feelings of the
parties and there was no good reason why the decree should not be
granted. He made up the final papers, gave Tessier notice, and
deposited the record with the clerk. Justice Cruden, then sitting
in Special Term, Part III., signed the judgment. And the deed was
done. Mrs. Cheever was permitted to resume her maiden name, but
that meant too much confusion; she needed the "Mrs." for protection
of a sort.

The divorce carried with it a clause forbidding the guilty husband
to marry any one else before five years had passed. But while the
divorce was legal all over the world, this restriction ended at
the State bounds.

So Peter Cheever and Zada L'Etoile went over into the convenient
realm of New Jersey the next morning, secured a license, and on the
following day were there made man and wife before all the world.
This entitled them to a triumphant return to New York. And now Peter
Cheever had also done the honorable thing. This "honorable thing"
business will be one of the first burdens dropped by the men when
the women perfect their claim to equality.

In about two weeks a daughter was born to the happy twain. Thanks to
Charity's obliging nature, it was christened in church and accepted
in law as a complete Cheever. Mr. and Mrs. and Miss Cheever now began
to live (more or less) happily ever after (temporarily).

Altogether it was a triumph of legal, social, and surgical technic.
It outraged many virtuous people. There was a good deal of harsh
criticism of everybody concerned. The worthies who believe that
divorce is the cause of the present depraved state of the United
States bewailed one more instance of the vile condition of the
lawless Gomorrah. The eternal critics of the rich used the case as
another text in proof of the complete control that wealth has over
our courts, though seventy-five divorces to obscure persons were
granted at the same time without difficulty, with little expense
and no newspaper punishment.

Dr. Mosely wrote Charity a letter of heartbroken condemnation,
and she slunk away to the mountains to escape from the reproach
of all good people and to recuperate for another try at the French
war hospitals. She had let her great moving-picture project lapse.
She felt hopelessly out of the world and she was afraid to face
her friends. Still, she had money and her "freedom," and one really
cannot expect everything.




CHAPTER VI

The ninety days following Charity's encounter with Jim Dyckman and
his bride at Sherry's had been busy times for her and epochal in
their changes. From being one of the loneliest and most approved
women in America she had become one of the loneliest and least
approved. Altruism is perhaps the most expensive of the virtues.

No less epochal were those months for the Dyckmans, bride and groom.
Their problems began to bourgeon immediately after they left New
Jersey and went to Kedzie's old apartment for further debate as to
their future lodgings.

Mr. and Mrs. Thropp were amazed by their sudden return. Adna was
a trifle sheepish. They found him sitting in the parlor in his
shirt-sleeves and stocking feet, and staring out of the window at
the neighbors opposite. In Nimrim it was a luxury to be able to spy
into the windows of one neighbor at a time. Opposite Adna there were
a hundred and fifty neighbors whom it cost nothing to watch. Some
of them were very startling; some of them were stupid old ladies who
rocked, or children who flattened their noses against the windows,
or Pekingese doglets who were born with their noses against a pane,
apparently. But some of the neighbors were fascinatingly careless
of inspection--and they always promised to be more careless than
they were.

Mrs. Thropp came rushing in from the kitchen. She had been trying
in vain to make a friend of Kedzie's one servant. But this maid,
like a self-respectful employee or a good soldier, resented the
familiarity of an official superior as an indecency and an insult.
She made up her mind to quit.

After Mrs. Thropp had expressed her wonderment at seeing her children
return, she turned the full power of her hospitality on poor Jim
Dyckman. He could not give notice and seek another job.

Mrs. Thropp's first problem was the proper style and title of
her son-in-law.

"What am I goin' to call you, anyhow?" she said. "_Jim_ sounds
kind of familiar on short acquaintance, and _James_ is sort of
distant. _Son-in-law_ is hor'ble, and _Son_ is--How would
you like it if I was to call you '_Son_'? What does your own
mother call you?"

"_Jimsy_" Jim admitted, shamefacedly.

"_Jimsy_ is right nice," said Mrs. Thropp, and she Jimsied him
thenceforward, to his acute distress. He found that he had married
not Kedzie only but all the Thropps there were. The father and mother
were the mere foreground of a vast backward and abyss of relations,
beginning with a number of Kedzie's brothers and sisters and their
wives and husbands. Jim was a trifle stunned to learn what lowly
jobs some of his brothers-in-law were glad to hold.

Mrs. Thropp felt that it was only right to tell Jim as much as she
could about his new family. She told him for hours and hours. She
described people he had never seen or heard of and would travel many
a mile to avoid. He had never cared for genealogy, and his own long
and brilliant ancestry did not interest him in the slightest. He had
hundreds of relations of all degrees of fame and fortune, and he
felt under no further obligation to them than to let alone and be
let alone.

His interest in his new horde of relations-in-law was vastly less
than nothing. But Mrs. Thropp gave him their names, their ages,
habits, diseases, vices, mannerisms, idiosyncrasies. She recounted
doings and sayings of infinite unimportance and uninterest.

With the fatuous, blindfolded enthusiasm of an after-dinner speaker
who rambles on and on and on while the victims yawn, groan, or fold
their napkins and silently steal away, Mrs. Thropp poured out her
lethal anecdotes.

Jim went from weariness to restiveness, to amazement, to wrath,
to panic, to catalepsy, before Kedzie realized that he was being
suffocated by these reminiscences. Then she intervened.

Mrs. Thropp's final cadence was a ghastly thought:

"Well, now, I've told you s'much about all our folks, you must tell
me all about yours."

"The Lord forbid!" said Jim.

Mrs. Thropp took this to mean that he did not dare confess the
scandals of his people. She knew, of course, from reading, that rich
people are very wicked, but she did want to know some of the details.

Jim refused to make disclosures. He was wakened from his coma by
Mrs. Thropp's casual remark:

"Say, Jimsy, how do folks do, on East here? Will your mother call
on me and Kedzie, or will she look for us to call on her first?"

"My God!" thought Jim.

"What say?" said Mrs. Thropp.

Jim floundered and threshed. He had never before realized what his
mother's famous pride might mean. She had always been only mother
to him, devoted, tender, patient, forgiving, amusing, sympathetic,
anxious, flattered by his least attention. Yet he had heard her
spoken of as a human glacier for freezing social climbers and pushers
of every sort. She was huge and slow; she could be frightfully cold
and crushing.

Now he understood what congelation the trembling approachers to her
majesty must have suffered. He was afraid to think what she would
do to the Thropps. Her first glance would turn them to icicles and
her first word would snap them to bits.

It is hard enough for any mother to receive the news that her son
is in love with any woman and wants to marry her. Mrs. Dyckman
must learn that her adored child had transferred his loyalty to
a foreigner, a girl she had never seen, could not conceivably have
selected, and could never approve. Even the Prodigal Son, when
he went home, did not bring a wife with him. Ten to one if he had
brought one she would have got no veal--or if she got it she would
not have cared for it.

Jim could not be blind even now in his alarm to Kedzie's intense
prettiness, but seeing her as through his mother's eyes coldly,
he saw for the first time the plebeiance of her grace.

If she had been strong and rugged her commonness would have had a
certain vigor; but to be nearly refined without being quite refined
is as harrowing as singing just a little off the key. To be far off
the key is to be in another key, but to smite at a note and muff it
is excruciation. Better far to drone middle C than to aim at high C
and miss it by a comma.

Yet Jim understood that he could not long prevent the encounter of
his wife and her relatives with his mother and her relatives. He
could not be so boorishly insolent as to forbid the meeting, and he
could not be so blind as to expect success. He got away at length on
the pretext of making arrangements with his mother, who was a very
busy woman, he said. Mrs. Thropp could not imagine why a rich woman
should be busy, but she held her whist.

Jim was glad to escape, even on so gruesome an errand, and now when
he kissed Kedzie good-by he had to kiss momma as well. He would
almost rather have kissed poppa.

He entered his home in the late afternoon with the reluctance
of boyhood days when he had slunk back after some misdemeanor.
He loathed his mission and himself and felt that he had earned
a trouncing and a disinheritance.

He found his mother and father in the library playing, or rather
fighting, a game of double Canfield. In the excitement of the finish
they were like frantic children, tied in knots of hurry, squealing
with emulation. The cards were coming out right, and the speedier
of the two to play the last would score two hundred and fifty to
the other's nothing.

Mrs. Dyckman was the more agile in snatching up her cards and
placing them. Her eyes darted along the stacks with certainty,
and she came in first by a lead of three cards.

Dyckman was puffing with exhaustion and pop-eyed from the effort
to look in seven directions at once. It rendered him scarlet to
be outrun by his wife, who was no Atalanta to look at. Besides,
she always crowed over him insufferably when she won, and that was
worse than the winning. When Jim entered the room she was laughing
uproariously, pointing the finger of derision at her husband and
crying:

"Where did you get a reputation as a man of brains? There must be
an awful crowd of simpletons in Wall Street." Then she caught sight
of her son and beckoned to him. "Come in and hold your father's
head, Jimsy."

"Please don't call me Jimsy!" Jim exploded, prematurely.

His mother did not hear him, because his father exploded at the
same moment:

"Come in and teach your mother how to be a sport. She won't play
fair. She cheats all the time and has no shame when she gets caught.
When she loses she won't pay, and when she wins she wants cash on
the nail."

"Of course I do!"

"Why, there isn't a club in the country that wouldn't expel you
twice a week."

"Well, pay me what you owe me, before you die of apoplexy."

"How much do I owe you?"

"Eight dollars and thirty-two cents."

"I do not! That's robbery. Look here: you omitted my score twice
and added your own up wrong."

"Did I really?"

"Do five and two make nine?"

"Don't they?"

"They do not!"

"Well, must you have hydrophobia about it? What difference
does it make?"

"It makes the difference that I only owe you three dollars
and twenty-six cents."

"All right, pay it and simmer down. Isn't he wonderful, Jimsy? He
just sent a check for ten thousand dollars to the fund for blind
French soldiers and then begrudges his poor wife five dollars."

"But that's charity and this is cards; and it's humiliating to
think that you haven't learned addition yet."

Mrs. Dyckman winked at Jim and motioned him to sit beside her.
He could not help thinking of the humiliating addition he was about
to announce to the family. While his father counted out the change
with a miserly accuracy he winked his off eye at Jim and growled,
with a one-sided smile:

"Where have you been for the past few days, and what mischief have
you been up to? You have a guilty face."

But Mrs. Dyckman threw her great arm about his great shoulders,
stared at him as she kissed him, and murmured: "You don't look
happy. What's wrong?"

Jim scraped his feet along the floor gawkily and mumbled: "Well, I
suppose I'd better tell you. I was going to break it to you gently,
but I don't know how."

Mrs. Dyckman took alarm at once. "Break it gently? Bad news? Oh,
Jim, you Haven't gone and got yourself engaged to some fool girl,
have you? Not that?"

"Worse than that, mother!"

"Oh dear! what could be worse? Only one thing, Jim! You haven't--you
haven't married a circus-rider or a settlement-worker or anything
like that, have you?"

"No."

"Lord! what a relief! I breathe again."

Jim fired off his secret without further delay. "I've been married,
though."

"Married? Already? Married to what? Anybody I ever heard of?"

His mother was gasping in a dangerous approach to heart failure.
Jim protested.

"You never saw her, but she's a very nice girl. You'll love her
when you meet her."

Jim's father sputtered as he pulled himself out of his chair:
"Wha-what's this? You--you damned young cub! You--why--what--who--oh,
you jackass! You big, lumbering, brainless, heartless bonehead!
Oh--whew! Look at your poor mother!"

Jim was frightened. She was pounding at her huge breast with one
hand and clutching her big throat with another. Her husband whirled
to a siphon, filled a glass with vichy, and gave it to Jim to hold
to her lips while he ran to throw open a window.

Jim knelt by his mother and felt like Cain bringing home the news
of the first crime. Her son's remorse was the first thing that
Eve felt, no doubt; at least, it was the first that Mrs. Dyckman
understood when the paroxysm left her. She felt so sorry for her
lad that she could not blame him. She blamed the woman, of course.
She cried awhile before she spoke; then she caressed Jim's cheeks
and blubbered:

"But we mustn't make too much of a fuss about a little thing like
a wedding. It's his first offense of the kind. I suppose he fell
into the trap of some little devil with a pretty face. Poor innocent
child, with no mother to protect him!"

"Poor innocent scoundrel!" old Dyckman snarled. "He probably got
her into trouble, and she played on his sympathy."

This was what Jim sorely needed, some unjust accusation to spur him
out of his shame. He sprang to his feet and confronted his father.

"Don't you dare say a word against my wife."

"Oh, look at him!" his father smiled. "He's grown so big he can
lick his old dad. Well, let me tell you, my young jackanapes, that
if anybody has said anything against your wife it was you."

"What have I said?"

"You've said that you married her secretly. You've not dared to let
us see her first. You've not dared to announce your engagement and
take her to the church like a gentleman. Why? Why? Answer me that,
before you grow so tall. And who is she, anyway? I hear that you had
a prize-fight with Peter Cheever and got expelled from the club."

"When did you hear that?"

"It's all over town. What was the fight about? Was he interested
in this lady, too?"

One set of Jim's muscles leaped to the attack; another set held
them in restraint.

"Be careful, dad!" he groaned. "Peter Cheever never met my wife."

"Well, then, what were you fighting him about?"

"That's my business."

"Well, it's my business, too, when I find the name of my son posted
for expulsion on the board of my pet club. You used to be sweet on
Cheever's wife. You weren't fighting about her, were you?"

This chance hit jolted the bridegroom so perceptibly that his
father regretted having made it. He gasped:

"Great Lord, but you're the busy young man! Solomon in all
his glory--"

"Let him alone now," Mrs. Dyckman broke in, "or you'll have me on
your hands." She needed only her husband's hostility to inflame her
in defense of her son. "If he's married, he's married, and words
won't divorce him. We might as well make the best of it. I've no
doubt the girl is a darling, or Jim wouldn't have cared for her.
Would you, Jimsy?"

"Naturally not," Jim agreed, with a rather sickly enthusiasm.

"Is she nice-looking?"

"She is famous for her beauty."

"Famous! Oh, Heavens! That sounds ominous. You mean she's
well known?"

"Very--in certain circles."

"In certain circles!" Mrs. Dyckman was like a terrified echo. She
had known of such appalling misalliances that there was no telling
how far her son might have descended.

Old Dyckman snarled, "Do you mean that you've gone slumming for
a wife?"

Jim dared not answer this. His mother ignored it, too. But her
thoughts were in a panic.

"What circles is she famous in, your wife, for her beauty?"

Jim could not achieve the awful word "movies" at the moment. He
prowled round it.

"In professional circles."

"Oh, an actress, then?"

"Well, sort of."

"They call everything an actress nowadays. She isn't a--a chorus-girl
or a show-girl?"

"Lord, no!" His indignation was reassuring to a degree.

His father broke in again, "It might save a few hours of dodging
and cross-examination if you'd tell us who and what she is."

"She is known professionally as Anita Adair."

So parochial a thing is fame that the title which millions of
people had learned to know and love meant absolutely nothing to
the Dyckmans. They were so ignorant of the new arts that even Mary
Pickford meant hardly more to them than Picasso or Matisse.

Jim brought out a photograph of Kedzie, a small one that he carried
in his pocket-book for company. The problem of what she looked like
distracted attention for the moment from the problem of what she did
and was.

Mrs. Dyckman took the picture and perused it anxiously. Her husband
leaned over her shoulder and studied it, too. He was mollified
and won by the big, gentle eyes and that bee-stung upper lip. He
grumbled:

"Well, you're a good chooser for looks, anyway. Sweet little thing."

Mrs. Dyckman examined the face more knowingly. She saw in those big,
innocent eyes a serene selfishness and a kind of sweet ruthlessness.
In the pouting lips she saw discontent and a gift for wheedling. But
all she said was, "She's a darling."

Jim caught the knell-tone in her praise and feared that Kedzie was
dead to her already. He saw more elegy in her sigh of resignation
to fate and her resolution to take up her cross--the mother's cross
of a pretty, selfish daughter-in-law.

"You haven't told us yet how she won her--fame, you said."

And now Jim had to tell it.

"She has had great success in the--the--er--pictures."

"She's a painter--an illustrator?"

"No, she--well--you know, the moving pictures have become very
important; they're the fifth largest industry in the world, I
believe, and--"

The silence of the parents was deafening. Their eyes rolled together
and clashed, as it were, like cannon-balls meeting. Dyckman senior
dropped back into his chair and whistled "Whew!" Then he laughed
a little:

"Well, I'm sure we should be proud of our alliance with the fifth
largest industry. The Dyckmans are coming up in the world."

"Hush!" said Mrs. Dyckman. She was thinking of the laugh that rival
mothers would have on her. She was thinking of the bitterness of
her other children, of her daughter who was a duchess in England,
and of the squirming of her relatives-in-law. But she was too fond
of her boy to mention her dreads. She passed on to the next topic.

"Where are you living?"

"Nowhere yet," Jim confessed. "We just got in from our--er--honeymoon
this morning. We haven't decided what to do."

Then Mrs. Dyckman took one of those heroic steps she was capable of.

"You'd better bring her here."

"Oh no; she'd be in your way. She'd put you out."

"I hope not, not so soon," Mrs. Dyckman laughed, dismally. "She'll
probably not like us at all, but we can start her off right."

"That's mighty white of you, mother."

"Did you expect me to be--yellow?"

"No, but I thought you might be a little--blue."

"If she'll make you happy I'll thank Heaven for her every day and
night of my life. So let's give her every chance we can, and I hope
she'll give us a chance."

Jim's arms were long enough to encircle her and hug her tight. He
whispered to her, "I never needed you more, you God-blessed--mother!"

Her tears streamed down her cheeks upon his lips, and he had a little
taste of the bitterness of maternal love. She felt better after she
had cried a little, and she said, with courage:

"Now we mustn't keep you away from her. If you want me to, I'll go
along with you and call on her and extend a formal invitation."

Jim could not permit his revered mother to make so complete a
submission as that. He shook his head:

"That won't be necessary. I'll go get Kedzie."

"Kedzie? I thought her name was Anita."

"That was her stage name--her film name."

"Oh! And her name wasn't Adair, either, perhaps?"

"No, it was--er--Thropp!"

"Oh!" She wanted to say "What a pretty name!" to make it easier for
him, but she could not arrange the words on her tongue. She asked,
instead, "Is she American?"

"American? I should say so! Born in Missouri."

Another "Oh!" from the mother.

Jim swallowed a bit more of quinine and made his escape, saying:

"You're as fine as they make 'em, mother. I won't be gone long."

The father was so disgusted with the whole affair that he could only
save himself from breaking the furniture by a sardonic taunt:

"Tell our daughter-in-law that if she wants to bring along her camera
she can have the ballroom for a studio. We never use it, anyway."

"Shame on you!" his wife cried. "Don't mind him, Jimsy."

"Jimsy" reminded Jim of Mrs. Thropp and his promise to ask his mother
to call on her. But he had confessed all that he could endure. He
was glad to get away without letting slip the fact that "Thropp" had
changed to "Dyckman" _via_ "Gilfoyle."

His mother called him back for another embrace and then let him go.
She had nowhere to turn for support but to her raging husband, and
she found herself crying her eyes out in his arms. He had his own
heartbreak and pridebreak, but he was only a man and no sympathy need
be wasted on him. He wasted none on himself. He laughed ruefully.

"You were saying, mother, only awhile ago that you wished he'd marry
some nice girl. Well, he's married, and we'll have to take what he
brings us. But, oh, these children, these damned children!"

A little later he was trying to brace himself and his wife against
the future.

"After all, marriage is only an infernal gamble. We might have
scoured the world and picked out an angel for him, and she might
have run off with the chauffeur the second week. I guess I got the
only real angel that's been captured in the last fifty years. The
boy may have stumbled on a prize unbeknownst. We'll give the kid
the benefit of the doubt, anyway. Won't we?"

"Of course, dear, if she'll give us the same."

"Well, Jim said she came from Missouri. We've got to show her."

"Ring for Wotton, will you?"

"What are you going to tell him?"

"The truth."

"Good Lord! Do you dare do that?"

"I don't dare not to. They'll find it out down-stairs quickly
enough in their own way."

"I see. You want to beat 'em to it."

"Exactly."

For years the American world had been discussing the duty of parents
to teach their children the things they must inevitably learn in
uglier and more perilous ways. There were editorials on it, stories,
poems, novels, numberless volumes. It even reached the stage. Mrs.
Dyckman had left her own children to find things out for themselves.
It occurred to her that she should not make the same mistake with
the eager servants who gave the walls ears and the keyholes eyes.

It was a ferocious test of her courage, but she knew that she
would have all possible help from Wotton. He had not only been the
head steward of the family ship in countless storms, but he had an
inherited knowledge of the sufferings of homes. He had learned his
profession as page to his father, who had been a butler and the son
of a butler.

Wotton came in like a sweet old earl and waited while Mrs. Dyckman
gathered strength to say as offhandedly as if she were merely
announcing that Jim was arrested for murder:

"Oh, Wotton, I wanted to tell you that Mr. James Dyckman has
just brought us the news of his marriage."

Wotton's eyebrows went up and his hands sought each other and
whispered together as he faltered:

"Indeed, ma'am! That is a surprise, isn't it?"

"He has married a very brilliant young lady who has had great
success in--ah--in the--ah--moving pictures."

The old man gulped a moment, but finally got it down. "The moving
pictures! Indeed, ma'am! My wife and I are very fond of the--the
movies, as the saying is."

"Everybody is, isn't they--aren't they? Perhaps you have seen Miss
Anita Adair in the--er--pictures."

"Miss Anita Adair? Oh, I should say we 'ave! And is she the young
lady?"

"Yes. They are coming to live with us for a time."

"Oh, that will be very pleasant! Quite an honor, you might say--That
will make two extra at dinner, then?"

"Yes. No--that is, we were expecting Mr. and Mrs. Schuyler, but
I wish you would telephone them that I am quite ill--not very, you
understand--a bad cold, I think, would be best. Something to keep
me to my room for the day."

"Very good, ma'am. Was there anything else?"

"No--oh yes--ask Mrs. Abby to have the Louis Seize room made ready,
will you?"

"Very good--and some flowers, per'aps, I suppose."

"Yes."

"Thank you."

He shuffled out, bowed under the weight of the calamity, as if
he had an invisible trunk on his back. He gathered the servants
in solemn conclave in their sitting-room and delivered a funeral
oration over young Mr. Jim. There were tears in the eyes of the
women-servants and curses in the throats of the men. They all adored
Mr. Jim, and their recent pride in his triumph over Peter Cheever
was turned to ashes. He had married into the movies! They supposed
that he must have been drinkin' very 'ard. Jim's valet said:

"This is as good as handin' me my notice."

But, then, Dallam was a ratty soul and was for deserting a sinking
ship. Wotton and the others felt that their loyalty was only now to
be put to the test. They must help the old folks through it. There
was one ray of hope: such marriages did not last long in America.




CHAPTER VII

Jim hastened to Kedzie, and she greeted him with anxiety. She saw
by his radiant face that he brought cheerful news.

"I've seen mother," he exclaimed, "and she's tickled to death with
your picture. She wants to see you right away. She wouldn't listen
to anything but your coming right over to live at our house till
we decide what we want to do."

Kedzie's heart turned a somersault of joy; then it flopped.

"I've got no clothes fit for your house."

"Oh, Lord!" Jim groaned. "What do you think we are, a continual
reception? You can go out to-morrow and shop all you want to."

"We-ell, all ri-ight," Kedzie pondered.

Jim was taken aback at her failure to glow with his success; and
when she said, "I hate to leave momma and poppa," he writhed.

He had neither the courage nor the inclination to invite them to come
along and make a jolly house-party. There was room enough for a dozen
Thropps in the big house, but he doubted if there were room in his
mother's heart for three Thropps at a time, or for the elder Thropps
at any time. After all, his mother had some rights. He protected them
by lying glibly.

"My mother sent you her compliments, Mrs. Thropp, and said she would
call on you as soon as she could. She's very busy, you know--as I
told you. Well, come along, Kedzie. I'd like to have you home in
time for dinner."

"You dress for dinner, I suppose."

"Well, usually--yes."

"But I haven't--"

"If you dare say it, I'll murder you. What do they care what
you've got on? They want to meet you, not your clothes."

She saw that he was in no mood to be trifled with; so she delayed
only long enough to fling into a small trunk a few of her best duds.
She remembered with sudden joy that Ferriday had made her a gift of
one or two of the gowns Lady Powell-Carewe had designed for her
camera-appearances, and she took them along for her debut into the
topmost world. Jim arranged by telephone for the transportation of
her luggage, and they set out on their new and hazardous journey.

Kedzie bade her mother and father a farewell implying a beautiful
distress at parting. She thought it looked well, and she felt that
she owed to her mother her present splendor. She was horribly afraid,
too, of the ordeal ahead of her. She was, indeed, approaching one
of the most terrifying of duels: the first meeting of a mother and
a wife.

Kedzie was not half so afraid as the elder Dyckmans were; for she
had her youth and her beauty, and they were only a plain, fat old
rich couple whose last remaining son had been stolen from them by
a stranger who might take him from them altogether or fling him back
at their feet with a ruined heart.

In her moving pictures Kedzie had played the millionairess many
a time, had driven up in state to mansions, and been admitted by
moving-picture butlers with frozen faces and only three or four
working joints. She had played the millionairess in boudoir and
banquet-hall; she had been loved by nice princes and had foiled
wicked barons. She had known valets and grooms and footmen
familiarly; but they had all been moving-picture people, actors
like herself.

As the motor approached the Dyckman palace she recalled what Ferriday
had told her about how different real life in millionairedom was from
studio luxury, and she almost wished she had stayed married to Tommie
Gilfoyle.

In her terror she seized the usual armor that terror assumes--bluff.
It would have been far better for her and everybody if she had
entered meekly into the presence of the very human old couple at her
approach, and had said to them, not in so many words, but at least
by her simple manner:

"I did not select my birthplace or my parents, my soul or my body or
my environment. I am not ashamed of them, but I want to make the best
of them. I am a new-comer in your world and I am only here because
your son happened to meet me and liked me and asked me to marry him.
So excuse me if I am frightened and ill at ease. I don't want to take
him away from you, but I want to love you as he does and have you
love me as he does. So help me with your wisdom."

If she had brought such a message or implied it she would have walked
right into the living-room of the parental hearts. But poor Kedzie
lacked the genius and the inspiration of simplicity and frankness,
and she marched up the steps in a panic which she disguised all too
well in a pretense of scorn that proclaimed:

"I am as good as you are. I have been in dozens of finer homes than
this. You can't teach me anything, you old snobs. I've got your son,
and you'd better mind your p's and q's."

Wotton opened the door and put on as much of a wedding face as he
could. Jim saw that the old man was informed, and he said:

"This is Wotton, my dear. He's the real head of the house."

Kedzie might better have shaken hands with him than have given him
the curt nod she begrudged him. She looked past him to see Mrs.
Dyckman, in whose arms she found herself smothered. Mrs. Dyckman,
in her bride-fright, had rather rushed the situation.

Kedzie hardly knew what to do. She was overawed by the very bulk as
well as the prestige of her mother-in-law. She did not quite dare
to embrace Mrs. Dyckman, and she could think of nothing at all
to say.

Mrs. Dyckman was impressed with Kedzie's beauty and paid it
immediate tribute.

"Oh, but you are an exquisite thing! No wonder our boy is mad
about you."

Kedzie's heart pranced at this, and she barely checked the giggle
of triumph that bounded in her throat. But the only thing she could
think of was what she dared not say: "So you're the famous Mrs.
Dyckman! Why, you're fatter than momma." She said nothing, but wore
one of her most popular smiles, that look of wistful sweetness that
had melted countless of her movie worshipers.

She was caught from Mrs. Dyckman's shadow by Jim's father, who
said, "Don't I get a kiss?" and took one. Kedzie returned this
kiss and found the old gentleman very handsome, not in the least
like her father. Brides almost always get along beautifully with
fathers-in-law. And so do sons-in-law. Women will learn how to get
along together better as soon as it ceases to be so important to
them how they get along together.

After the thrill of the first collision the four stood in silenced
embarrassment till Jim, eager to escape, said:

"What room do we get?"

"Cicely's, if you like," his mother answered.

Jim was pleased. Cicely was the duchess of the family, and she and
her duke had occupied that room before they went to England. Cicely
was a war nurse now, bedabbled in gore, and her husband was a
mud-daubed major in the trenches along the Somme. Jim saw that his
mother was making no stint of her hospitality, and he was grateful.

He dragged Kedzie away. She was trying to take in the splendor of
the house without seeming to, and she went up the stairway with
her eyes rolling frantically.

In the Academy at Venice is that famous picture of Titian's
representing the little Virgin climbing up the steps of the Temple,
a pathetic, frightened figure bearing no trace of the supreme
radiance that was to be hers. There was something of the same
religious awe in Kedzie's heart as she mounted the steps of the
house that was a temple in her religion. She was going up to her
heaven already. It was perfection because it was the next thing.

When Kedzie reaches the scriptural heaven, if she does (and it will
be hard for Anybody to deny her anything that she sets her heart on),
she will be happy till she gets there and finds that she is only in
the first of the seven heavens. But what will the poor girl do when
she goes on up and up and up and learns at last that there is no
eighth? She will weep like another Alexander the Great, because
there are no more heavens to hope for.

Jim led her into the best room there was up-stairs, and told her
that a duke had slept there. At first she was thrilled through.
Later it would occur to her, not tragically, yet a bit quellingly,
that, after all, she had not married a duke herself, but only a
commoner. She had as much right to a title as any other American
girl. A foreign title is part of a Yankee woman's birthright.
Hundreds of women had acquired theirs. Kedzie got only a plain
"Mr."

Still, she told herself that she must not be too critical, and she
let her enthusiasm fly. She did not have to pose before Jim, and
she ran about the suite as about a garden.




CHAPTER VIII

Kedzie was smitten with two facts: the canopied bed was raised on
a platform, and the marble bath-tub was sunk in the floor. She sat
on the bed and bounced up and down on the springs. She stared up
at the tasseled baldachin with its furled draperies, and fingered
the lace covering and the silken comforter.

She sat in the best chairs, studied the dressing-table with its
royal equipment. She went to the window and gazed out into Fifth
Avenue, reviewing its slow-flowing lava of humanity--young royalty
overlooking her subjects.

Mrs. Abby, the housekeeper, knocked and came in to be presented to
the new Princess of Wales, and to present the personal maid who had
been assigned to her. Even Mrs. Dyckman was afraid of Mrs. Abby,
who lacked the suavities of Wotton. Mrs. Abby gave Kedzie the chill
of her life, and Kedzie responded with an ardent hatred.

The maid, a young Frenchwoman, found her black dress with its black
silk apron an appropriate uniform, since her father, three brothers,
a dozen cousins, and two or three of her sweethearts were at the
wars. Some of them were dead, she knew, and the others were on their
way along the red stream that was bleeding France white, according
to German hopes.

Liliane, being a foreigner, saw in Kedzie the pathos of the alien,
and with the unequaled democracy of the French, forgave her her
plebeiance for that sake. She welcomed Kedzie's beauty, too,
and regarded her as a doll of the finest ware, whom it would be
fascinating to dress up. Kedzie and Liliane would prosper famously.

Liliane resolved that when Kedzie appeared at dinner she should
reflect credit not only on "Monsieur Zheem," but on Liliane as well.
When Kedzie's trunk arrived and Liliane drew forth the confections
of Lady Powell-Carewe she knew that she had all the necessary
weapons for a sensation.

Kedzie felt more aristocracy in being fluttered over by a French
maid with an accent than in anything she had encountered yet.
Liliane's phrase "Eef madame pair-meet" was a constant tribute
to her distinction.

Jim retired to his own dressing-room and faced the veiled contempt
of his valet, leaving Kedzie to the ministrations of Liliane, who
drew the tub and saw that it was just hot enough, sprinkled the
aromatic bath-salts, and laid out the towels and Kedzie's things.

Women are born linen-lovers, and Kedzie was not ashamed to have
even a millionaire maid see the things she wore next to her skin,
and Liliane was delighted to find by this secret wardrobe that
her new mistress was beautifully equipped.

She waited outside the door till Kedzie had stepped from the fragrant
pool--then came in to aid in the harnessing. She saw nothing but
the successive garments and had those ready magically. She laced
the stays and slid the stockings on and locked the garters and set
the slippers in place. She was miraculously deft with Kedzie's hair,
and her suggestions were the last word in tact. Then she fetched
the dinner-gown, floated it about Kedzie as delicately as if it
were a ring of smoke, hooked it, snapped it, and murmured little
compliments that were more tonic than cocktails.

When Jim came in he was struck aglow by Kedzie's comeliness and by
a certain authority she had, Liliane pointed to her, as an artist
might point to a canvas with which he has had success, and demanded
his admiration. His eyes paid the tribute his lips stammered over.

Kedzie was incandescent with her triumph, and she went down the
stairway to collect her dues.

Her parents-in-law were waiting, and she could see how tremendously
they were impressed and relieved by her grace. What did it matter who
she was or whence she came? She was as irresistible as some haunting
phrase from a folk-song, its authorship unknown and unimportant, its
perfection inspired.

Kedzie floated into the dining-room and passed the gantlet of the
servants. Ignoring them haughtily, she did not ignore the sudden
change of their scorn to homage. Nothing was said or done; yet the
air was full of her victory. Much was forgiven her for her beauty,
and she forgave the whole household much because of its surrender.

It was a family dinner and not elaborate. Mr. and Mrs. Dyckman
had arrived at the stage when nearly everything they liked to eat
or drink was forbidden to them. Jim had an athlete's appetite for
simples, and Kedzie had an actress' dread of fattening things and
sweets. There was a procession of dishes submitted to her inspection,
but seeing them refused first by Mrs. Dyckman, she declined most
of them in her turn.

Kedzie had been afraid that she would blunder in choice among a
long array of forks, but she escaped the test, since each course
was accompanied by the tools to eat it with. There was a little
champagne to toast the bride in.

She found the grandeur of the room belittling to the small party at
table. There were brave efforts to make her feel at home and brief
sallies of high spirits, but there was no real gaiety. How could
there be, when there was no possible congeniality? The elder couple
had lived in a world unknown to Kedzie. Their son had dazed them by
his sudden return with a strange captive from beyond the pale. She
was a pretty barbarian, but a barbarian she was, and no mistake.
She was not so barbaric as they had feared, but they knew nothing
of her past or of her.

It is not good manners to deal in personal questions; yet how else
could such strangers come to know one another? The Dyckmans were
afraid to quiz her about herself, and she dared not cross-examine
them. They had no common acquaintances or experiences to talk over.
The presence of the servants was depressing, and when the long meal
was over and the four Dyckmans were alone in the drawing-room, they
were less at ease than before. They had not even knives and forks
to play with.

Mrs. Dyckman said at length, "Are you going to the theater, do
you think?"

Jim did not care--or dare--to take his bride abroad just yet.
He shook his head. Mrs. Dyckman tried again:

"Does your wife play--or sing, perhaps?"

"No, thank you," said Kedzie, and sank again.

Mrs. Dyckman was about to ask if she cared for cards, but she was
afraid that she might say yes. She grew so desperate at last that
she made a cowardly escape:

"I think we old people owe it to you youngsters to leave you alone."
She caught up her husband with a glance like a clutching hand, and
he made haste to follow her into the library.

Jim and Kedzie looked at each other sheepishly. Kedzie was taking
her initiation into the appalling boredom that can close down in
a black fog on the homes and souls of the very wealthy. She was
astounded and terrified to realize that there is no essential delight
attending the possession of vast means. Later she was to find herself
often one of large and glittering companies where nothing imaginable
was lacking to make one happy except the power to be happy. She would
go to dinners where an acute melancholia seemed to poison the food,
where people of the widest travel and unfettered opportunities could
find nothing to say to one another.

If she had loved Jim more truly, or he her, they could have been
blissful in spite of their lack of hardships; but the excitement of
flirtation had gone out of their lives. There seemed to be nothing
more to be afraid of except unhappiness. There seemed to be nothing
to be excited about at all. Time would soon provide them with wild
anxieties, but he withheld his hand for the moment.

Jim saw that Kedzie was growing restless. He dragged himself from
his chair and clasped her in his arms, but the element of pity in
his deed took all the fire out of it. He led her about the house
and showed her the pictures in the art gallery, but she knew nothing
about painters or paintings, and once around the gallery finished
that room for her forever. There were treasures in the library to
fascinate a bibliophile for years, but Kedzie knew nothing and cared
less about books as books; and a glance into the somber chamber where
the old people played cards listlessly drove her from that door.

The dinner had begun at eight and finished at half past nine. It was
ten o'clock now, and too late to go to the theater. The opera season
was over. There would be the dancing-places, but neither of the two
felt vivacity enough for dancing or watching others dance.

For lack of anything better, Jim proposed a drive. He was mad for
air and exercise. He would have preferred a long walk, and so would
Kedzie, but she could not have walked far without changing her
costume and her slippers.

She was glad of the chance to escape from the house. Jim rang for
Wotton and asked to have a car brought round. They put on light
wraps and went down the steps to the limousine.

The Avenue was lonely and the Park was lonelier. And, strangely, now
that they were together in the dark they felt happier; they drew more
closely together. They were common people now, and they had moonlight
and stars, a breeze and a shadowy landscape; they shared them with
the multitude, and they were happy for a while.

Something in Kedzie's heart whispered: "What's the use of being rich?
What's the good of living in a palace with a gang of servants hanging
over your shoulder? Happiness evidently doesn't come from ordering
whatever you want, for by the time somebody brings it to you you
don't want it any longer. Happiness must be the going after something
yourself and being anxious about it."

If she had listened to that airy whisperer she might have had an
inkling of a truth. But she dismissed philosophy as something stupid.
She turned into Jim's arms like a child afraid and clung to him,
moaning:

"Jim, what do I want? Tell me. I'm bluer than blue, and I don't know
why."

This was sufficiently discouraging for Jim. He had given the petulant
child the half of his kingdom, and she was blue. If anything could
have made him bluer than he was it would have been this proclamation
of his failure. He had done the honorable thing, and it had profited
nobody.

He petted her as one pets a spoiled and fretful child at the end of
a long, long rainy day, with a rainy to-morrow ahead.

When they returned home the coziness of their hour together was lost.
The big mansion was as cozy as a court-house. It no longer had even
novelty. Climbing the steps had no further mystery than the Louvre
has to an American tourist who has promenaded through it once.

Her room was brilliant and beautiful, but the things she liked about
it most were the homely, comfortable touches: her bedroom slippers by
her chair, her nightgown laid across her pillow, and the turned-down
covers of the bed.

Liliane knocked and came in, and Jim retreated. It was pleasant for
the indolent Kedzie to have the harness taken from her. She yawned
and stretched and rubbed her sides when her corsets were off, and
when her things were whisked from sight and she was only Kedzie
Thropp alone in a nightgown she was more nearly glad than she had
been for ever so long.

She flung her hair loose and ran about the room. She sang grotesquely
as she brushed her teeth and scumbled her face with cold-cream,
rubbed it in and rubbed it out again. She was so glad to be a mere
girl in her own flesh and not much else that she went about the room
crooning to herself. She peeked out of the window at the Avenue, as
quiet as a country lane at this hour, save for the motors that slid
by as on skees and the jog-trot of an occasional hansom-horse.

She was crooning when she turned to see her husband come in in a
great bath-robe; he might have been a solemn monk, save for the big
cigar he smoked.

He was so dour that she laughed and ran to him and flung him into
a chair and clambered into his lap and throttled him in her arms,
crying:

"Oh, Jim, I am happy. I love you and you love me. Don't we?
Say we do!"

"Of course we do," he laughed, not quite convinced.

He could not resist her beauty, her warmth, her ingratiation. But
somehow he could not love her soul.

He had refused to make her his mistress before they were married.
Now that they were married, that was all he could make of her.
Their life together was thenceforward the life of such a pair. He
squandered money on her and let her squander it on herself. They
had ferocious quarrels and ferocious reconciliations, periods of
mutual aversion and tempests of erotic extravagance, excursions
of hilarious good-fellowship, hours of appalling boredom.

But there was a curious dishonesty about their relation: it was
an intrigue, not a communion. They were never closer to each other
than a reckless flirtation. Sometimes that seemed to be enough
for Kedzie. Sometimes she seemed to flounder in an abyss of gloomy
discontent.

But sleep was sweet for her that first night in the bed where
the duchess had lain. She had an odd dream that she also became
a duchess. Her dreams had a way of coming true.




CHAPTER IX

So there lay Kedzie Thropp of Nimrim, Missouri, the Girl Who Had
Never Had Anything. At her side was the Man Who Had Always Had
Everything. Under this canopy a duke and duchess had lain.

There was an element of faery in it; yet far stranger things have
happened and will happen anew.

There was once a Catholic peasant of Lithuania who died of the
plague, leaving a baby named Martha Skovronsky. A Protestant preacher
adopted the waif, and while she was yet a girl got rid of her by
marrying her to a common Swedish soldier, a sergeant. The Russians
bombarded the town; the Swedes fled; and a Russian soldier captured
the deserted wife in the ruins of, the city. He passed her on to his
marshal. The marshal sold her as a kind of white slave to a prince;
the prince took her to Russia as his concubine. Being of a liberal
disposition, he shared her capacious heart with the young czar, who
happened to be married. Martha Skovronsky bore him a daughter and
won his heart for keeps. He had her baptized in the Russian Church
as Catherine. He divorced his czaritza that he might marry the
foundling. He set on his bride's head the imperial crown studded
with twenty-five hundred gems. She became the Empress Catherine I.
of Russia and went to the wars with her husband, Peter the Great,
saved him from surrendering to the Turks, and made a success of a
great defeat for him.

He loved her so well that when she was accused of flirting with
another man he had the gentleman decapitated and his head preserved
in a jar of alcohol as a mantel ornament for Catherine's room. When
he died she reigned in his stead, recalling to her side as a favorite
the prince who had purchased her when she was a captive.

Alongside such a fantastic history, the rise of Kedzia Thropp was
petty enough. It did not even compare with the rocket-flight of that
Theodosia who danced naked in a vile theater in Byzantium and later
became the empress of the great Justinian.

Kedzie had never done anything very immoral. She had been a trifle
immodest, according to strict standards, when she danced the Grecian
dances. She had been selfish and hard-hearted, but she had never
sold her body. And there is no sillier lie, as there is no commoner
lie, than the trite old fallacy of the popular novels, sermons,
editorials, and other works of fiction that women succeed by selling
their bodies. It is one of the best ways a girl can find for going
bankrupt, and it leads oftener to the dark streets than to the bright
palaces.

The credit for Kedzie's staying virtuous, as the word is used, was
not entirely hers. Probably if all the truth were known women are
no oftener seduced than seducing. Kedzie might have gone wrong half
a dozen times at least if she had not somehow inspired in the men
she met a livelier sense of protection than of spoliation. She
happened not to be a frenzied voluptuary, as are so many of the lost,
who are victims of their own physiological or pathological estates
before they make fellow-victims of the men they encounter.

The trick of success for a woman who has no other stock in trade
than her charm is to awaken the chivalry of men, to promise but not
relinquish the last favors till the last tributes are paid.

Meanwhile the old world is rolling into the daylight when women
will sell their wits instead of their embraces, and when there will
be no more compulsion for a woman to rent her body to pay her house
rent than for men to do the same. The pity of it is that these great
purifying, equalizing, freedom-spreading revolutions are gaining
more opposition than help from the religious and the conservative.

In any case Kedzie Thropp, who slept under a park bench when first
she came to town, found the city honorable, merciful, generous, as
most girls do who have graces to sell and sense enough to set a high
price on them.

And so Kedzie was sheltered and passed on upward by Skip Magruder
the lunch-room waiter, and by Mr. Kalteyer the chewing-gum purveyor,
by Eben E. Kiam the commercial photographer, by Thomas Gilfoyle the
advertising bard, by Ferriday the motion-picture director, on up
and up to Jim Dyckman. Every man gave her the best help he could.
And even the women she met unconsciously assisted her skyward.

But there is always more sky above, and Kedzie's motto was a
relentless _Excelsior!_ She spurned backward the ladders she
rose by, and it was her misfortune (which made her fortune) that
whatever rung she stood on hurt her pretty, restless feet. It was
inevitable that when at last she was bedded in the best bed in one
of America's most splendid homes, she should fall a-dreaming of
foreign splendors beyond the Yankee sky.

On the second morning of her honeymoon, when Kedzie woke to find that
she was no duchess, but a plain American "Mrs." that disappointment
colored her second impression of the Dyckman mansion.

She had her breakfast in bed. But she had enjoyed that dubious
luxury in her own flat. Many poor and lazy and sick people had the
same privilege. The things she had to eat were exquisitely cooked
and served, when Liliane took them from the footman at the door and
brought them to the bedside.

But, after all, there is not much difference between the breakfasts
of the rich and of the poor. There cannot be: one kind of fruit,
a cereal, an egg or two, some coffee, and some bread are about all
that it is safe to put into the morning stomach. Her plutocratic
father-in-law was not permitted to have even that much, and her
mother-in-law, who was one of the converts to Vance Thompson's
_Eat and Grow Thin_ scriptures, had almost none at all.

Busy and anxious days followed that morning. There was a great amount
of shopping to do. There were the wedding-announcement cards to order
and the list of recipients to go over with Mrs. Dyckman's secretary.
There was a secretary to hire for Kedzie, and it was no easy matter
for Kedzie to put herself into the woman's hands without debasing
her pride too utterly.

There was the problem of dinners to relatives, a reception to guests
for the proper exploitation of the new Mrs. Dyckman. There was the
embarrassment of meeting people who brought their prejudices with
their visiting-cards and did not leave their prejudices as they did
their cards.

The newspapers had to have their say, and they did not make pleasant
reading to any of the Dyckmans. Kedzie took a little comfort from
reading what the papers had to say about Mrs. Cheever's divorce,
but she found that Jim was unresponsive to her gibes. This did not
sweeten her heart toward Charity.

Kedzie was hungry for friends and playmates, but she could not find
them among the new acquaintances she made. She saw curiosity in all
their eyes, patronage in those who were cordial, and insult in those
who were not effusive. She got along famously with the men, but their
manner was not quite satisfactory, either. There was a corrosive
something in their flattery, a menace in their approach.

There were the horrible experiences when Mrs. Dyckman called on
Mrs. Thropp and the worse burlesque when Mrs. Thropp called on
Mrs. Dyckman. The servants had a glorious time over it, and Kedzie
overheard Mrs. Dyckman's report of the ordeal to her husband. She
was angry at Mrs. Dyckman, but angrier still at her mother.

Kedzie's father and mother were an increasing annoyance to Kedzie's
pride and her peace. They wanted to get out to Nimrim and make a
triumph through the village. And Jim and Kedzie were glad to pay
the freight. But once the Thropps had gloated they were anxious to
get back again to the flesh-pots of New York.

The financing of the old couple was embarrassing. It did not look
right to Kedzie to have the father and mother of Mrs. Dyckman a
couple of shabby, poor relations, and Kedzie called it shameful that
her father, who was a kind of father-in-law-in-law to the duchess,
should earn a pittance as a claim-agent in the matter of damaged
pigs and things.

Jim, like all millionaires, had dozens of poor relations and felt
neither the right nor the obligation to enrich them all. There is
no gesture that grows tiresome quicker than the gesture of shoving
the hand into the cash-pocket, bringing it up full and emptying it.
There is no more painful disease than money-spender's cramp.

Kedzie learned, too, that to assure her father and mother even so
poor an income as five thousand dollars a year would require the
setting aside of a hundred thousand dollars at least in gilt-edged
securities. She began to have places where she could put a hundred
thousand dollars herself. On her neck was one place, for she
saw a woman with a dog-collar of that price, and it made Kedzie
feel absolutely nude in contrast. She met old Mrs. Noxon with her
infamously costly stomacher on, and Kedzie cried that night because
she could not have one for her own midriff.

Jim growled, "When you get a stomach as big as Mrs. Noxon's you
can put a lamp-post on it."

She said he was indecent, and a miser besides.

Meanwhile her own brothers, sisters, cousins, and aunts were calling
her a miser, a snob, a brute. The whole family wanted to move to New
York and make a house-party. They had every right to, too, for did
not the Declaration of Independence make all Americans equal?

Relatives whom Kedzie had never heard of and relatives whom she knew
all too well turned up in New York with schemes for extracting money
from the Dyckman hoard. Kedzie grew nearly wroth enough to stand at
the window and empty things on them as they dared to climb the noble
steps with their ignoble impertinences.

When she was not repelling repulsive relatives Kedzie was trying
to dodge old acquaintances. It seemed that everybody she had ever
met had learned of her rise in the world. Her old landladies wrote
whining letters. Moving-picture people out of a job asked her for
temporary loans.

But the worst trial came one day when she was present at a committee
meeting for a war-relief benefit and that fiend of a Pet Bettany
proposed that one of the numbers should be Miss Silsby's troupe of
Greek dancers. She asked if anybody had any objections, and when
nobody spoke she turned to Kedzie and dared to ask her if she had
ever seen the dancers.

"Not recently," Kedzie mumbled, while her very legs blushed under
their stockings, remembering how bare they had been in the old days
when she was one of the Silsby slaves.

All the other women simmered pleasantly in the uncomfortable
situation till Mrs. Charity Cheever, who chanced to be there,
came to the rescue amazingly by turning the tables on the Bettany
creature:

"Anybody who ever saw you in a bathing-suit, Pet, would know that
there were two good reasons why you were never one of the Silsbies."

Charity could be cruel to be kind. Everybody roared at Pet, whose
crooked shanks had kept her modest from the knees down, at least.
Kedzie wanted to kiss Charity, but she suffered too much from the
reminder of her past.

She fiercely wanted to have been born of an aristocratic family.
Of all the vain wishes, the retroactive pluperfect are the vainest,
and an antenatal wish is sublimely ridiculous. But Kedzie wished it.
This was one of the wishes she did not get.




CHAPTER X

Mrs. Kedzie Dyckman received many jars of ointment, but her pretty
eyes found a fly in every one. She that should have gone about
boasting, "I came from a village and slept under a park bench, and
now look at me!" was slinking about, wishing that she could rather
say: "Oh, see my wonderful ancestors! Without them you could not
see me at all."

Kedzie had her picture printed at last in the "Social World"
departments of the newspapers. She had full-page portraits of herself
by the mystic Dr. Arnold Genthe and by other camera-masters printed
in _Town and Country_ and _The Spur, Vanity Fair, Vogue_
and _Harper's Bazar_. But some cursed spite half the time led
to the statement under her picture that she had been in the movies.
No adjectives of praise could sweeten that. Small wonder she pouted!

And she found the competition terrific. She had thought that when
she got into the upper world she would be on a sparsely populated
plateau. But she said to Jim:

"Good Lord! this is a merry-go-round! It's so crowded everybody
is falling off."

The most "exclusive" restaurants were packed like bargain-counters.
She went to highly advertised balls where there were so many people
that the crowd simply oozed and the effort to dance or to eat was
a struggle for life.

New York's four hundred families had swollen, it seemed, to four
hundred thousand, and the journals of society published countless
pictures of the aristocratic sets of everywhere else. There were
aristocrats of the Long Island sets--a dozen sets for one small
island--the Berkshire set, the Back Bay set, the Rhode Island reds,
the Plymouth Rock fowl, the old Connecticut connections, the Bar
Harbor oligarchy, the Tuxedonians, the Morristown and Germantown
noblesse, the pride of Philadelphia, the Baltimorioles, the
diplomatic cliques of Washington, the Virginia patricians, the
Piedmont Hunt set, the North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia,
Florida, and all the other State sets, the Cleveland coteries,
the Chicagocracy, the St. Louis and New Orleans and San Francisco
optimates.

Exclusiveness was a joke. And yet Kedzie felt lonely and afraid. She
had too many rivals. There were young girls in myriads, beauties by
the drove, sirens in herds, millionaires in packs. The country was
so prosperous with the privilege of selling Europe the weapons of
suicide that the vast destructiveness of the German submarines was
a bagatelle.

There was a curious mixture of stupendous Samaritanism and tremendous
indifference. Millions were poured into charities and millions were
squandered on dissipation.

Kedzie's funds were drawn away astoundingly faster than even Dyckman
could replenish them. Hideous accounts of starving legions were
brandished before the eyes of all Americans. Every day Kedzie's mail
contained circulars about blind soldiers, orphan-throngs, bread-lines
in every nation at war. There were hellish chronicles of Armenian
women and children driven like cattle from desert to desert, outraged
and flogged and starved by the thousand.

The imagination gave up the task. The miseries of the earth were
more numerous than the sands, and the eyes came to regard them as
impassively as one looks at the night sky without pausing to count
the flakes in that snowstorm of stars. One says, "It is a nice
night." One said, "These are terrible times." Then one said, "May
I have the next dance?" or, "Isn't supper ready yet?"

Kedzie tried for a while to lift herself from the common ruck
of the aristocracy by outshining the others in charities and in
splendors. She soon grew weary of the everlasting appeals for money
to send to Europe. She grew weary of writing checks and putting on
costumes for bazaars, spectacles, parades, and carnivals. She found
herself circumscribed by so much altruism. Her benevolences left her
too little for her magnificences.

She grew frantic for more fun and more personal glory. The
extravagance of other women dazed her. Some of them had
inexhaustible resources. Some of them were bankrupting their
own boodle-bag husbands. Some of them flourished ingeniously by
running up bills and never running them down.

The competition was merciless. She kept turning to Jim for money.
He grew less and less gracious, because her extravagances were more
and more selfish. He grew less and less superior to complaints. He
started bank-accounts to get rid of her, but she got rid of them
with a speed that frightened him. He hated to be used.

Kedzie took umbrage at Mrs. Dyckman's manner. Mrs. Dyckman tried
for a while to be good to the child, strove to love her, forgave
her for her youth and her humble origin; but finally she tired of
her, because Kedzie was not making Jim's life happier, more useful,
or more distinguished.

Then one day Mrs. Dyckman asked Kedzie for a few moments of her
time. Kedzie was in a hurry to an appointment at her hairdresser's,
but she seated herself patiently. Mrs. Dyckman said:

"My dear, I have just had a cable from my daughter Cicely. She has
broken down, and her physician has ordered her out of England for
a rest. She is homesick, she says, and Heaven knows we are homesick
for her.

"I am afraid she would not feel at home in any room but her old
one, and I know you won't mind. You can have your choice. Some of
the other rooms are really pleasanter. Will you look them over and
let me know, so that I can have your things moved?"

"Certainly, my dear m'mah!" said Kedzie.

She walked blindly down the Avenue, snubbing her most precious
acquaintances. She was being put out of her room! She was being
shoved back to the second place. They'd ask her to eat at the second
table next, or have her meals in her room as the secretaries did.

Not much! Having slept in a duchess's bed, Kedzie would not
backslide. She would get a bed of her own. She remembered a
nice young man she had met, whose people were in real estate.
She telephoned to him from the Biltmore.

"Is that you, Polly? This is Kedzie Dyckman. Say, Polly, do you
know of a decent house that is for sale or rent right away quick?
Oh, I don't care how much it costs, so it's a cracker jack of
a house. I suppose I've got to take it furnished, being in such
a hurry; or could you get a gang of decorators in and do a rush
job? All right, look up your list right away and telephone me here
at the hairdresser's."

From under her cascade of hair she talked to him later and arranged
to be taken from place to place. She now dismissed chateaux with
contempt as too small, too old-fashioned, lacking in servants'
rooms, what not. She had quite forgotten the poor little Mrs.
Gilfoyle she had been, and her footsore tramp from cheap flat to
cheap flat, ending in the place that cost three hundred dollars
a year furnished.

She finally decided not to attempt housekeeping yet awhile, and
selected a double-decked apartment of twenty-four rooms and
forty-eight baths. And she talked the agent down to a rental of
ten thousand dollars a year unfurnished. She would show Jim that
she could economize.

When Kedzie told Mrs. Dyckman that she had decided to move, Mrs.
Dyckman was very much concerned lest Kedzie feel put out. But she
smiled to herself: she knew her Kedzie.

Jim was not at all pleased with the arrangement, but he yielded.
In the American family the wife is the quartermaster, selects the
camp and equips it. Jim spent more of his time at his clubs than
at his duplex home. So did Kedzie. She had been railroaded into
the Colony and one or two other clubs before they knew her so well.

When the Duchess Cicely came back Kedzie was invited to the family
dinner, of course. Cicely was Kedzie's first duchess, and though
Kedzie had met any number of titled people by now, she approached
this one with strange apprehensions. She was horribly disappointed.
Cicely turned out to be a poor shred of a woman in black, worn out,
meager, forlorn, broken in heart and soul with what she had been
through.

She was plainly not much impressed with Kedzie, and she said to
her mother later: "Poor Jim, he always plays in the rottenest luck,
doesn't he? Still, he's got a pretty doll, and what does anything
matter nowadays?"

She tried to be polite about the family banquet. But the food choked
her. She had seen so many gaunt hands pleading upward for a crust of
bread. She had seen so many shriveled lips guzzling over a bowl of
soup. She had seen so many once beautiful soldiers who had nothing
to eat anything with.

Cicely apologized for being such a death's head at the feast, but
she was ashamed of her people, ashamed of her country for keeping
out of the war and fattening on it. All the motives of pacifism,
of neutrality, of co-operation by financing and munitioning the
war, were foul in her eyes. She knew only her side of the conflict,
and she cared for no other. She found America craven and indifferent
either to its own obligations or its own dangers. She accused the
United States of basking in the protection of the British navy
and the Allied armies. She felt that the immortal crime of the
_Lusitania_ with its flotsam of dead women and children was
more disgraceful to the nation that endured it than to the nation
that committed it. She was very, very bitter, and Kedzie found her
most depressing company, especially for a dinner-table.

But she excited Jim Dyckman tremendously. He broke out into fierce
diatribes against the Chinafying of the United States with its
Lilliputian army guarding its gigantic interests. He began to toy
with the idea of enlisting in the Canadian army or of joining the
American aviators flying for France.

"The national bird is an eagle," he said, with unwonted poesy,
"and the best place an American eagle can fly is over France."

When Kedzie protested: "But you've got a family to consider. Let
the single men go," Jim laughed louder and longer than he had
laughed for weeks.

Cicely smiled her first smile and squeezed Jim's hand.




CHAPTER XI

Kedzie went home early. It was depressing there, too. Now that she
had a house of her own, she found an extraordinary isolation in it.
Almost nobody called.

When she lived under the Dyckman roof she was included in the cards
left by all the callers; she was invited into the drawing-room to
meet them; she was present at all the big and little dinners, and
breakfasts and teas and suppers.

People who wanted to be asked to more of the Dyckman meals and
parties swapped meals and parties with them and included Kedzie
in their invitations, since she was one of the family. She went
about much in stately homes, and her name was celebrated in what
the newspapers insist upon calling the "exclusive" circles.

Kedzie laughed at the extraordinary inclusiveness of their High
Exclusivenesses until she got her own home. And then she learned
its bitter meaning. It was not that Mrs. Dyckman meant to freeze
her out. She urged her to "come in any time." But, as Kedzie told
Jim, "an invitation to come any time is an invitation to stay away
all the time." Kedzie's pride kept her aloof. She made it so hard
to get her to come that Mrs. Dyckman sincerely said to Cicely:

"We are too old and stupid for the child. She is glad to be rid
of us."

Mrs. Dyckman planned to call often, but she was an extremely busy
woman, doing many good works and many foolish works that were just
as hard. She said, "I ought to call," and failed to call, just as
one says, "I ought to visit the sick," and leaves them to their
supine loneliness.

Thus Kedzie floated out of the swirling eddies where the social
driftwood jostled in eternal circles. She sulked and considered
the formalities of who should call on whom and who owed whom a call.
New York life had grown too busy for anybody to pay much attention
to the older reciprocities of etiquette.

Almost nobody called on Kedzie. She took a pride in smothering
her complaints from Jim, who was not very much alive to her hours.
He was busy, too. He had joined the Seventh Regiment of the New York
National Guard, and it absorbed a vast amount of his time. He had
gone to the Plattsburg encampment the summer before and had kept up
with the correspondence-school work in map problems, and finally he
had obtained a second lieutenancy in the Seventh Regiment. It was his
little protest against the unpreparedness of the nation as it toppled
on the brink of the crater where the European war boiled and smoked.

One midnight after a drill he found Kedzie crying bitterly. He took
her in his arms, and his tenderness softened her pride so that she
wept like a disconsolate baby and told him how lonely she was. Nobody
called; nobody invited her out; nobody took her places. She had no
friends, and her husband had abandoned her for his old regiment.

He was deeply touched by her woe and promised that he would take
better care of her. But his military engagements were not elastic.
He dared not neglect them. They took more and more of his evenings
and invaded his days. Besides, he was poor company for Kedzie's mood.
He had little of the humming-bird restlessness, and he could not keep
up with her flights. She had darted her beak into a flower, and its
nectar was finished for her before she had realized that it was
a flower.

He felt that what she needed was friends of her own sex. There were
women enough who would accept Kedzie's company and gad with her, vie
with her quivering speed. But they were not the sort he wanted her to
fly with. He wanted her to make friends with the Charity Coe type.

The next day Jim grew desperate enough to call on Charity. She was
out, but expected in at any moment. He sat down to wait for her.
The room, the books, the piano--all spoke of her lovingly and
lovably. He went to the piano and found there the song she had
played for him once in Newport--"Go, Lovely Rose!"

He thought it a marvelous coincidence that it should be there on
the rack. Like most coincidences, this was not hard to explain. It
chanced to be there because Charity played it often. She was lonelier
than Kedzie and almost as helpless to amuse herself. She read vastly,
but the stories of other people's unhappy loves were a poor anodyne
for her own. She thought incessantly of Jim Dyckman. Remembering
the song she had played for him, and his bitter comment on the verse,
"Tell her that wastes her time and me," she hunted it out, and the
plaintive chimes of Carpenter's music made a knell for her own hopes.

She had played it this very afternoon and wrought herself to such
sardonic regret that she forced herself into the open air. She walked
a mile or two, but slunk back home again to be rid of the crowds.

She was thinking of Dyckman when she entered her house. She let
herself in with her own key, and, walking into the drawing-room,
surprised him at the piano, reading the tender elegy of the rose.

"Jim!" she gasped.

"Charity!" he groaned.

Their souls seemed to rush from their bodies and embrace. But their
bodies stood fast before the abyss that gaped between them.

She whipped off her glove before she gave him her hand. That meeting
of the flesh was so bitter-sweet that their hands unclasped guiltily
by a kind of honest instinct of danger.

"What on earth brought you here?" Charity faltered.

"Why--I--Well, you see--it's like this." He groped for words, but,
having no genius in invention, he blurted the truth helplessly: "I
came to ask you if you wouldn't--You see, my poor wife isn't making
out very well with people--she's lonesome--and blue--and--why can't
you lend a hand and make friends with her?"

Charity laughed aloud. "Oh, Jim, Jim, what a darling old numskull
you are!"

"In general, yes; but why just now?"

"Your wife will never make friends with me."

"Of course she will. She's lonely enough to take up with anybody."

"Thanks!"

"Well, will you call?"

"Have you told her you were going to ask me to?"

"Not yet."

"Then I'll call, on one condition."

"What's that, Charity Coe?"

"That you don't tell her. You'd better not, or she'll have my eyes
and your scalp."

"But you'll call, won't you?"

"Of course. Anything you say--always."

"You're the damnedest decentest woman in the world, Charity Coe;
and if--"

He paused. It is just as well not to go iffing about such matters.

Charity stopped short in her laughter. She and Jim stared at each
other again across that abyss. It was terribly deep, but only
a step over.

They heard the door-bell faintly, and a sense of guilt confused
them again. Jim rose and wished himself out of it.

"It's only Prissy Atterbury," said Charity.

Prissy came in tugging at the ferocious mustaches that only
emphasized his lady-like carriage. He paused on the door-sill
to stare and gasp, "My Gawd, at it again!"

They did not know what he meant, and he would not explain that he
had seen them together ages ago and spread the gossip that they were
in intrigue. The coincidence of his recurrence on their scene was not
strange, for Charity had been using him as a kind of messenger-boy.

Prissy was that sort. He looked the gentleman and was, a somewhat
too gentle gentleman, but very useful to ladies who needed an
uncompromising escort and were no longer young enough to permit
of chaperonage. He was considered perfectly harmless, but he was
a fiend of gossip, and he rejoiced in the recrudescence of the Jim
and Charity affair.

Jim confirmed Prissy's eager suspicions by taking himself off with
a maximum of embarrassment. Charity went to the door with him--to
kiss him good-by, as Prissy gloatingly supposed, but actually to
say:

"I'll call on your wife to-morrow."

"You're an angel," said Jim, and meant it.

He thought all the way home what an angel she was, and Charity was
thinking at the same time what a fool she had been to let Peter
Cheever dazzle her to the fact that Jim Dyckman was the one man in
the world that she belonged to. She needed just him and he just her.




CHAPTER XII

Sometimes Jim Dyckman was foolish enough to wish that he had been
his wife's first lover. But a man has to get up pretty early to be
that to any woman. The minxes begin to flirt with the milk-bottle,
then with the doctor, and then to cherish a precocious passion for
the first rag sailor-doll.

Jim had come as near as any man may to being a woman's first love
in the case of Charity, and what good had it done him? He was the
first boy Charity had ever played with. Her nurse had bragged about
her to his nurse when Charity was just beginning to take notice
of other than alimentary things. By that time Jim was a blase roue
of five and his main interest in Charity was a desire to poke his
finger into the soft spot in her head.

The nurses restrained him in time, and his proud, young, little
mother of then, when she heard of it, decided that he was destined
to be a great explorer. His young father sniffed that he was more
likely to be a gynecologist. They had a grand quarrel over their
son's future. He became none of the things they feared or hoped that
he would and he carried out none of his own early ambitions.

His first impressions of Charity had ranged from contempt, through
curiosity, to protectiveness and affection. She got his heart first
by being helpless. He began by picking up the things she let fall
from her carriage or threw overboard and immediately cried for again.
She had been human enough to do a good deal of that. When things
cumbered her crib or her perambulator she brushed them into space
and then repented after them.

Following her marriage to Peter Cheever she did just that with Jim
Dyckman. His love cluttered up her domestic serenity and she chucked
it overboard. And then she wanted it again. Then her husband chucked
her overboard and she felt that it would not be so lonesome out there
since Jim would be out there, too. But she found that he had picked
himself up and toddled away with Kedzie. And now he could not pick
Charity up any more. His wife wouldn't let him.

Jim did not know that he wanted to pick Charity up again till he
called on her to ask her to call on his wife and pick Kedzie up out
of her loneliness. It was a terrific thought to the simple-minded
Jim when it came over him that the Charity Coe he had adored and
given up as beyond his reach on her high pedestal was now lying at
the foot of it with no worshiper at all.

Jim was the very reverse of a snob. Kedzie had won his devotion by
seeming to need it. She had lost it by showing that she cared less
for him than for the things she thought he could get for her. And
now Charity needed his love.

There were two potent principles in Jim's nature, as in many another
man's and woman's; one was an instant eagerness to help anybody
in trouble; another was an instant resentment of any coercion. Jim
could endure neither bossing nor being bossed; restraint of any sort
irked him. There may have been Irish blood in him, but at any rate
the saying was as true of him as of the typical Irishman--"You can
lead him to hell easier than you can drive him an inch."

When Jim left Charity's house his heart ached to think of her
distressful with loneliness. When he realized that somehow Kedzie
was automatically preventing him from helping Charity his marital
bonds began to chafe. He began to understand that matrimony was
hampering his freedom. He had something to resent on his own
behalf.

He had been so troubled with the thought of his shortcomings
in devotion to Kedzie that he had not pondered how much he had
surrendered. He had repented his inability to give Kedzie his
entire and fanatic love. He saw that he had at least given his
precious liberty of soul into her little hands.

Galled as he was at this comprehension, he began to think over the
lessons of his honeymoon and to see that Kedzie had not given him
entirety of devotion any more than he her. Little selfishnesses,
exactions, tyrannies, petulances, began to recur to him.

He was in the dangerous frame of mind of a bridegroom thinking
things over. At that time it behooves the bride to exert her
fascinations and prove her devotion as never before.

Kedzie, knowing nothing of Jim's call on Charity or of his new mood,
chanced to be in a most unfortunate humor. She criticized Jim;
she declined to be amused or entertained; rebuffed his advances,
ridiculed his pretensions of love. She even chose to denounce his
mother for her heartlessness, his sister for her neglect, his father
for his snobbery. That is always bad business. It puts a husband
at bay with his back against the foundation walls of loyalty. They
quarreled wonderfully and slept dos-a-dos. They did not speak the
next morning.

The next afternoon Jim saw to his dismay that Kedzie was putting on
her hat and gloves to go out on a shopping-cruise. If she went she
would miss Charity's call.

He knew that he ought not to tell her of Charity's visit in advance.
In fact, Charity had pledged him to a benevolent conspiracy in the
matter. He put up a flag of truce and resumed diplomatic relations.

With the diplomatic cunning of a hippopotamus he tried to decoy
Kedzie into staying at home awhile. His ponderous subtlety aroused
Kedzie's suspicions, and at length he confirmed them by desperately
confessing:

"Mrs. Cheever is going to call."

Kedzie's first thought was of Peter Cheever's new wife, who had been
taken up by a certain set of those whom one may call loose-principled
or divinely tolerant, as one's own prejudices direct. Kedzie could
not yet afford to be so forgiving. She flared up.

"Mrs. Cheever! That Zada thing going to call on me? How dare she!"

"Of course not."

"Oh, the other one, then?"

"Yes."

"The abandoned one?"

"That's pretty rough. She's been very kind to you and she wants
to be again."

"Where did you learn so much?"

"We were talking about you."

"Oh, you were, were you? That's nice! And where was all this?"

He indulged in a concessive lie for the sake or the peace. "I met
her in the street and walked along with her."

"Fine! And how did my name come to come up?"

"It naturally would. I was saying that I wished she'd--er--I wished
that you and she might be friends."

"So that you and she could see each other still oftener, I suppose."

"It's rotten of you to say that."

"And it's rottener of you to go talking to another woman about
your wife."

"But it was in the friendliest spirit, and she took it so."

"I see! Her first name is Charity and I'm to be one of her patients.
Well, you can receive her yourself. I don't want any of her old alms!
I won't be here!"

"Oh yes, you will!"

"Oh no, I won't!"

"You can't be as ill-mannered as that!"

"You talk to me of manners! Why, I've seen manners in your gang that
would disgrace a brakeman and a lunch-counter girl on one of dad's
railroads." Her father already had railroads! So many people had
them in the crowd she met that Kedzie was not strong enough to deny
her father one or two.

Kedzie had taken the most violent dislike to Charity for a dozen
reasons, all of them perfectly human and natural, and nasty and
unjustifiable, and therefore ineradicable. The first one was that
odious matter of obligation. Gratitude has been wisely diagnosticated
as a lively sense of benefits to come. The deadly sense of benefits
gone by is known as ingratitude.

No one knows just what the divinely unpardonable sin is, but the
humanly or at least womanly unpardonable sin is to have known one's
husband well before the wife met him, and then to try to be nice
to the wife. To have known the wife in her humble days and to have
done her a favor makes the sin unmentionable as well as unpardonable.

Jim Dyckman had involved himself in Charity's crime by trying to get
Charity to help his wife again. It was bad enough that Charity had
got Kedzie a job in the past and had sent Jim Dyckman to make sure
that she got it. But for Jim, after Kedzie and he had been married
and all, to ask Charity to rescue Kedzie from her social failure was
monstrous.

The fact that Jim had felt sorry for his lonely Kedzie marooned on
an iceberg in mid-society was humiliating enough; but for Charity
to dare to feel sorry for Kedzie, too, and to come sailing after
her--Kedzie shuddered when she thought of it.

She fought with her husband until it was too late for her to get
away. Charity's card came in while they were still wrangling. Kedzie
announced that she was not at home. Jim told the servant, "Wait!"
and gave Kedzie a look that she rather enjoyed. It was what they
call a caveman look. She felt that he already had his hands in her
hair and was dragging her across the floor bumpitty-bump. It made
her scalp creep deliciously. She was rather tempted to goad him
on to action. It would have a movie thrill.

But the look faded from Jim's eye and the blaze of wrath dulled to
a gray contempt. She was afraid that he might call her what she had
once overheard Pet Bettany call her--"A common little mucker." That
sort of contempt seared like a splash of vitriol.

Kedzie, like Zada, was a self-made lady and she wanted to conceal the
authorship from the great-grandmother-built ladies she encountered.

She pouted a moment, then she said to the servant, "We'll see her."
She turned to Jim. "Come along. I'll go and pet your old cat and
get her off my chest."




CHAPTER XIII

Jim thudded dismally along in her wake. Charity was in the
drawing-room wearing her politest face. She could tell from
Kedzie's very pose that she was as welcome as a submarine.

Kedzie said, "Awfully decent of you to come," and gave her
a handful of cold, limp fingers.

Charity politely pretended that she had called unexpectedly and that
she was in dire need of Kedzie's aid. She made herself unwittingly
ridiculous in the eyes of Kedzie, who knew and despised her motive,
not appreciating at all the consideration Charity was trying to show.

"I'm sorry to bother you, Mrs. Dyckman," Charity began, "but I've
got to throw myself on your mercy. A few of us are getting up a new
stunt for the settlement-work fund. It is to be rather elaborate
and ought to make a lot of money. It is to represent a day in the
life of a New York Bud. You can have your choice of several roles,
and I hope you will lend us a hand."

Kedzie had heard of this project and she had gnawed her bitter
heart in a chagrin of yearning to take part in it. She had not been
invited, and she had blenched every time she thought of it. She was
so much relieved at being asked that she almost forgave Charity for
her benevolence. She stammered: "It's awfully decent of you to ask
me. I'll do my bit with the greatest of pleasure."

She rather regretted those last five words. They were a bit
_Nimrimmy._

Charity sketched the program for her.

"The Bud is discovered in bed. A street piano wakes her. There is
to be a dance to a hurdy-gurdy. Then the Bud has breakfast. It is
served by a dancing maid and butler. Tom Duane is to be the butler.
You could be--no, you wouldn't fancy the maid, I imagine."

Kedzie did not fancy the maid.

Charity went on: "The girl dresses and goes to a rehearsal of the
Junior League. That's to be a ballet of harlequins and columbines.
She goes from there to her dressmaker's. I am to play the dressmaker.
I have my _mannequins,_ and you might want to play one of those
and wear the latest thing--or you could be one of the customers. You
can think it over.

"Then the girl is seen reading a magazine and there is a dance of
cover girls. If you have any favorite illustrator you could be one
of his types.

"Next the Bud goes to an art exhibition. This year Zuloaga is the
craze, and several of his canvases will come to life. Do you care
for Zuloaga?"

"Immensely, but--" Kedzie said, wondering just what Zuloaga did to
his canvases. She had seen a cubist exhibition that gave her a
headache, and she thought it might have something to do with Zulus.

Charity ran on: "After dinner the Bud goes to the theater and sees
a pantomime and a series of ballets, dolls of the nations--Chinese,
Polish, also nursery characters. You could select something in one
of those dances, perhaps.

"And last of all there is a chimney-sweeps' dance as the worn-out
Bud crawls into bed. If none of these suit you we'd be glad to have
any suggestion that occurs to you. Of course, a girl of to-day does
a thousand more things than I've mentioned. But the main thing is,
we want you to help us out.

"You are--if you'll forgive me for slapping you in the face with
a bouquet--you are exquisitely beautiful and I know that you dance
exquisitely."

"How do you know that?" Kedzie asked, rashly.

"I saw you once as a--" Charity paused, seeing the red run across
Kedzie's face. She had stumbled into Kedzie's past again, and
Kedzie's resentment braced her hurt pride.

Charity tried to mend matters by a little advice: "You mustn't blush,
my dear Mrs. Dyckman. If I were in your place I'd go around bragging
about it. To have been a Greek dancer, what a beautiful past!"

"Thanks!" said Kedzie, curtly, with basilisk eyes. "I think I'd
rather not dance any more. I'm an old married woman now. If you
don't mind, I'll be one of the customers at your shop. I'll come
in in the rippingest gown Jim can buy. I'll feel more comfortable,
too, under your protection, Mrs. Cheever."

Jim laughed and Kedzie grinned. But she was canny. She was thinking
that she would be safest among that pack of wolves if she relied on
her money to buy something dazzling rather than on the beauty that
Charity alleged. She did not want to dance before those people again.
She would never forget how her foot had slipped at Newport.

Thirdly, she felt that she would be sheltered a little from
persecution beneath the wing of Charity. It rather pleased her
to treat Charity as a motherly sort of person. It is the most
deliciously malicious compliment a woman can pay another.

Charity did not fail to receive the stab. But it amused her so far
as she was concerned. She felt that Kedzie was like one of those
incorrigible _gamines_ who throw things at kindly visitors to
the slums. She felt sorry for Jim, and wondered again by what strange
devices he had been led to marry so incompatible a girl as Kedzie.

Jim wondered, too. He sat and watched the two women, wondering as men
do when they see women painfully courteous to each other; wondering
as women must when they see men polite to their enemies.

Charity and Kedzie prattled on in a kind of two-story conversation,
and Jim studied them with shameless objectivity. He hardly heard
what they said. He watched the pantomime of their so different souls
and bodies: Charity, lean and smart and aristocratic, beautiful in
a peculiar mixture of sophistication and tenderness; Kedzie, small
and nymph-like and plebeian, beautiful in a mixture of innocence
and hardness of heart.

Charity's body was like the work of a dashing painter--long lines
drawn with brave force and direction. Kedzie's body was a thing of
dainty curves and timidities. Charity was fashionable and wise, but
her wisdom had lifted her above pettiness. Kedzie was of the village,
for all her Parisian garb, and she had cunning, which is the lowest
form of wisdom.

When at length Charity left, Jim and Kedzie sat brooding. Kedzie
wanted to say something nice about Charity and was afraid to. The
poor child always distrusted her generous impulses. She thought it
cleverer to withhold trust from everybody, lest she misplace it in
somebody. At length an imp of perversity taught her how to get rid
of the credit she owed to Charity. She spoke after a long silence.

"Mrs. Cheever must be horribly fond of you."

"Why do you say that?" said Jim, startled.

"Because she's so nice to me."

Jim groaned with disgust. Kedzie giggled, accepting the groan as
confession of a palpable hit. She sat musing on various costumes
she might wear. She had a woman's memory for things she had caught
a glimpse of in a shop-window or in a fashion magazine; she had
a woman's imagination for dressing herself up mentally.

As a trained mathematician can do amazing sums in his head, so Kedzie
could juggle modes and combinations, colors and stuffs, and wrap
hem about herself. While Kedzie composed her new gown, her husband
studied her, still wondering at her and his inability to get past
the barriers of her flesh to her soul. Charity's flesh seemed but
the expression of herself. It was cordial and benevolent, warm and
expressive in his eyes. Her hands were for handclasp, her lips for
good words, her eyes for honest language. He had not embraced her
except in dances years before, and in that one quickly broken embrace
at Newport. He had not kissed her since they had been boy and girl
lovers, but the savor of her lips was still sweet in his memory. He
felt that he knew her soul utterly.

He had possessed all the advantages of Kedzie without seeming to get
acquainted with the ultimate interior Kedzie at all. She was to him
well-known flesh inhabited by a total stranger, who fled from him
mysteriously. When she embraced him she held him aloof. When she
kissed him her lips pressed him back. He could not outgrow the
feeling that their life together was rather a reckless flirtation
than a communion of merged souls.

He stared at her now and saw dark eyebrows and eyelashes etched
on a white skin, starred with irises of strange hue, a nose deftly
shaped, a mouth as pretty and as impersonal as a flower, a throat
of some ineffably exquisite petal material. She sat with one knee
lifted a little and clasped in her hands, and there was something
miraculous about the felicity of the lines, the arms penciled
downward from the shoulders and meeting in the delicately contoured
buckle of her ten fingers, the thigh springing in a suave arc from
the confluent planes of her torse, the straight shin to the curve
of instep and toe and heel. Her hair was an altogether incredible
extravagance of manufacture.

George Meredith has described a woman's hair once for all, and
if Jim had ever read anything so important as _The Egoist_
he would have said that Kedzie's poll was illustrated in that
wonderfully coiffed hair-like sentence picturing Clara Middleton
and "the softly dusky nape of her neck, where this way and that
the little lighter-colored irreclaimable curls running truant from
the comb and the knot-curls, half-curls, root-curls, vine-ringlets,
wedding-rings, fledgling feathers, tufts of down, blown wisps--waved
or fell, waved over or up to involutedly, or strayed, loose and
downward, in the form of small silken paws, hardly any of them much
thicker than a crayon shading, cunninger than long, round locks of
gold to trick the heart."

Kedzie's hair was as fascinating as that, and she had many graces
and charms. For a while they had proved fascinating, but a man does
not want to have a cartoon, however complexly beautiful, for a wife.
Jim wanted a congenial companion--that is to say, he wanted Charity
Coe.

But he could not have her. If he had been one of the patriarchs or
a virtuous man of Mohammedan stock he could have tried, by marrying
a female quartet, to make up one good, all-round wife. But he was
doomed to a single try, and he had picked the wrong one.




CHAPTER XIV

What is a man to do who realizes that he has married the wrong
woman?

The agonies of the woman who has been married to the wrong man have
been celebrated innumerably and vats of tears spilled over them. She
used to be consigned to a husband by parental choice and compulsion.
Those days are part of the good old times.

For a man there never has been any sympathy, since he has not usually
been the victim of parental despotism in the matter of selecting
a spouse, or, when he has been, he has had certain privileges of
excursion. The excursion is still a popular form of mitigating the
severities of an unsuccessful marriage. Some commit murder, some
commit suicide, some commit other things. Marriage is the one field
in which instinct is least trustworthy and it is the one field in
which it is accounted immoral to repent errors of judgments or to
correct them.

The law has found it well to concede a good deal to the criminals.
After centuries of vain cruelty it was found that certain people
simply could not be made good by any rigor of confinement or any
heaping up of punishment. So the law has come down to the criminal
with results no worse at the worst than before, and sublimely better
at the best than before. The civil law is doing the same slowly for
the mal-married.

But Jim Dyckman was not even dreaming of seeking a rescue from
his mistake by way of a divorce.

Charity had entered the divorce court and she would always bear
the reproach of some of her most valued friends. She could not
imaginably encourage Jim Dyckman to free himself by the same
channel, and if he did, how could Charity marry him? The marriage
of two divorced persons would provoke a tempest of horror from part
of the world, and gales of ridicule from the rest. Besides, there
was no sign that Kedzie would ever give Jim cause for divorce, or
that he would make use of it if she gave it him.

Charity could not help pondering the situation, for she saw that Jim
was hopelessly mismated. Jim could not help pondering the situation,
for he saw the same thing. But he made no plans for release. Kedzie
had given no hint of an inclination to misconduct. She was certainly
not going to follow Gilfoyle into the beyond. Jim was left helpless
with an unanswerable riddle on his mind.

He could only curse himself for being fool enough to get married,
and join the vast club of the Repenters at Leisure. He felt sorrier
for Kedzie than ever, but he also felt sorry for himself.

The better he came to know his wife the more he came to know how
alien she was to him in how many ways. The things she wanted to be
or seem were utterly foreign to his own ideals, and if people's
ambitions war what hope have they of sympathy?

Jim could not help noticing how Kedzie was progressing in her
snobology. She had had many languages to learn in her brief day. She
had had to change from Missouri to flat New York, then upward through
various strata of diction. She had learned to speak with a certain
elegance as a movie princess. But she had learned that people of
social position do not talk on stilts outside of fiction. She had
since been trying to acquire the rough slang of her set. It was not
easy to be glib in it. She had attained only a careful carelessness
as yet. But she was learning! As soon as she had attained a careless
carelessness she would be qualified.

But there was another difficulty. She had not yet been able to make
up her mind as to what character she should play in her new world.
That had to be settled before she could make her final choice
of dialect, for dialect is character, and she had found, to her
surprise, that the upper world contained as great a variety of
characters as any other level.

There were tomboys and hoydens and solemn students; hard-working
sculptresses and dreamy poetesses; girls who wanted to be boys, and
girls who wanted to be nuns; girls who were frantic to vote, and
girls who loathed the thought of independence; girls who ached to
shock people, and girls of the prunes-and-prismatic type, patricians
and precisians, anarchists and Bohemians.

She encountered girls who talked appallingly about breeding dogs and
babies, about Freudian erotics, and new schools of art, Futurism,
Vorticism. Their main interest was Ismism. There were others whose
intellectuality ran to new card-mathematics in pirate bridge,
gambling algebra.

Kedzie was in a chaos of sincere convictions and even more sincere
affectations. She could not select an attitude for herself. She could
not recapture her own soul or decide what she wanted to be.

Her life was busy. She had to learn French and numberless intricacies
of fashionable ethics. She had already learned to ride a horse for
her moving-picture work, but Jim warned her that she must learn to
jump so that she could follow the hounds with him. She watched pupils
in hurdling and dreaded to add that to her accomplishments. It made
her seasick to witness the race to the barrier, the gathering of the
horse, the launch into space, the clatter of the top bar as it came
off sometimes, the grunting thud of the big brute as he returned to
earth and galloped away, not always with the rider still aboard. She
imagined herself skirled along the tan-bark and was afraid.

She had to summon all the courage of her movie days before she
could intrust herself to a riding-master. Soon she grew to like
the excitement; she learned to charge a fence, hand the horse his
head at the right moment, and take him up at the exact second. And
by and by she was laughing at other beginners and talking horsy talk
with such assurance that she rather gave the impression of tracing
straight back to the Centaur family.

Likewise now she watched other new-comers and rank outsiders break
into the sacred inclosure. She mocked them and derided them. She
regretted aloud the unfortunate marriages of well-born fellows with
actresses and commoners from beyond the pale. Among the first French
words she learned to use was _mesalliance_.

She began to wonder if she had not made one herself. She found
inside the paddock so many men more brilliant than her husband.
There were as many types of man as of woman--the earnest, the
ascetic, the socialistic, the pious youth, wastrels, rakes, fops.
There were richer men than Jim and men of still older family, men
of even greater wealth.

She had been married only a few weeks and she was already
speculating in comparisons! It was a more or less inescapable
result of a marriage for ambition, since each ambition achieved
opens a horizon of further ambitions.

She had a brief spell of delight in the rehearsals of the "Day of
the Bud." She met new people informally and they were all so shy
and self-conscious that they were not inclined to resent Kedzie's
intrusion. Kedzie would once have ridiculed them as "amachoors";
now she wished that she, too, were only an "amaturr" instead of
a reformed professional.

If some of the ladies snubbed her she found others that cultivated
her; a few of the humbler women even toadied to her position; a few
of the men snuggled up to her picturesque beauty. She snubbed them
with vigor. She hated them and felt smirched by their challenges.
That was splendid of her.

She was beginning to find herself and her party, but outside the
circle of Jim's immediate entourage. And Jim was beginning to find
himself a new ambition and a new circle of friends.




CHAPTER XV

Jim was becoming quite the military man. His new passion took him
away from womankind, saved him from temptation, and freed his
thoughts from the obsession of either Kedzie or Charity. The whole
nation was turning again toward soldiering, drifting slowly and
resistingly, but helplessly, into the very things it had long
denounced as Prussianism and conscription. A universal mobilization
was brewing that should one day compel all men and all women, even
little boys and girls and the very old, to become part of a giant
machinery for warfare.

England, too, had railed at conscription, and when the war smote her
had seen her little army of a quarter of a million almost annihilated
under the first avalanche of the German descent toward Paris. England
had gathered volunteers and trained them behind the bulwark of her
navy and the red wall of the bleeding French nation. And England had
given up volunteering and gone into the business of making everybody,
without distinction of sex, age, or degree, contribute life and
liberty and luxury to the common cause.

Behind the bulwark of the British fleet and the Allied armies
the United States had debated, not for weeks or months, but for
years with academic sloth the enlargement of its tiny army. It had
accomplished only the debate, a ludicrous haggle between those who
turned their backs on the world war and said that war was impossible
and those who declared that it was inevitable.

Some Americans asserted that it was none of America's business what
happened in Europe or how many American citizens died on the free
seas, and that the one way to bring war into our country was to be
prepared for it. Other Americans grew angry enough to forswear their
allegiance to a nation of poltroons and dotards; they went to France
or Canada to fight or fly for the Allies. Many of them died. Yet
others tried to equip themselves at home somewhat to meet the red
flood when it should break the dam and sweep across the American
borders.

Of these last was Jim Dyckman. Since he had joined the National
Guard he gave it more and more of his enthusiasm. Unhappily married
men have always fled to the barracks or the deck as ill-mated women
fled to convents.

Night after night Jim spent at the armory, drilling with his company,
conferring at headquarters, laboring for recruits, toiling over the
paper work.

Kedzie pouted awhile at his patriotism, ridiculed it and hated it,
and then accepted it as a matter of course. She could either stay
at home and read herself to sleep or join the crowds. The rehearsals
of the "Day of the Bud" gave her some business, and she picked up
a few new friends. She made her appearance with the company in a
three-nights' performance that netted several thousands of dollars.
Jim saw her once. She was gorgeous, a little too gorgeous. She did
not belong. She felt it herself, and overworked her carelessness.
Her non-success hurt her bitterly. People did not say of her, as
in the movies, "How sweet!" but, "Rather common!"

And now Kedzie was bewildered and lost. She found no comfort in
Jim. She had to seek companionship somewhere. At first she made her
engagements only on Jim's drill nights. Soon she made them on nights
when he was free.

When they met, each found the other's experiences of no importance.
Her indifference to the portentous meanings and campaigns of the
European war dazed him. He wondered how any human being could live
in such epochal weeks and take no thought of events. She was not
interested even in the accounts of the marvelous sufferings of women
and their marvelous achievements in the munition-plants, the fields,
and hospitals. He watched Kedzie skip the head-lines detailing some
sublime feat of endeavor like the defense of Verdun and turn to
the page where her name was included or not among the guests at
a dinner well advertised by the hostess. She would skip the pages of
photographs showing forth the daily epics of Europe and ponder the
illustrations of some new smock. He shook his head over her as if she
were a doll come to life and nothing stirring within but a music-box
and a sawdust heart. He was disappointed in her--abysmally. He
devoted himself to his military work as if he were a bachelor.

For the third year now the Americans were still discussing just what
sort of army it should have, and meanwhile getting none at all.

The opponents of preparedness grew so ferocious in their attacks
on the pleaders for troops that the word "pacifist" became
ironical. They seemed to think it a crime to assault anybody
but a fellow-countryman.

All the while the various factions of unhappy Mexico fought together
and threatened the peace of the United States. The Government that
had helped drag President Huerta from his chair with the help of
Villa and Carranza found itself in turn at odds with both its allies
and its allies at war with each other.

There were scenes of rapine and flights of refugees that brought
a little of Belgium to our frontier. And then the sombreros came
over the border at Columbus, New Mexico, one night with massacre
and escape, and the tiny American army under Pershing went over the
border to get its erstwhile ally, Villa, dead or alive, and got him
neither way.

And still Congress pondered the question of the army as if it were
something as remote and patient as a problem in sidereal arithmetic.
Some asked for volunteers and some for universal service and some
for neither. The National Guard was a bone of contention, and when
the hour struck it was the only bone there was.

In June Jim Dyckman went to the officers' school of application at
Peekskill for a week to get a smattering of tuition under Regular
Army instructors. He slept on a cot in a tent and studied map-making
and military bookkeeping and mimic warfare, and was tremendously
happy.

Kedzie made a bad week of it. She missed him sadly. There was no one
to quarrel with or make up with. When he came back late Saturday
night she was so glad to see him that she cried blissfully upon his
proud bosom.

They had a little imitation honeymoon and went a-motoring on Sunday
out into the lands where June was embroidering the grass with
flowers and shaking the petals off the branches where young fruit
was fashioning.

They discussed their summer schemes and she dreaded the knowledge
that in July he must go to the manoeuvers for three weeks. They
agreed to get aboard his yacht for a little cruise before that
dreadful interlude.

And then, early the next morning, the morning of the 19th of June,
the knuckles of his valet on the door woke Jim from his slumber
and a voice through the panels murmured:

"Very sorry, sir, but you are wanted on the telephone, sir--it's
your regiment."

That was the way the Paul Reveres of 1916 summoned the troops to
arms.

Mr. Minute-Man Dyckman sat on the edge of his bed in his silk pajamas
with the telephone-receiver at his ear, and yawned: "H'lo.... Who
is it?... What is it?... Oh, it's you, sergeant.... Yes?... No!...
For God's sake!... I'll get out right away."

"What's the matter? Is the house on fire?" Kedzie gasped from her
pillow, half-awake and only half-afraid, so prettily befuddled she
was with sleep. She would have made a picture if Jim had had eyes
to see her as she struggled to one elbow and thrust with her other
hand her curls back into her nightcap, all askew. Her gown was
sliding over one shoulder down to her elbow and up to one out-thrust
knee.

Jim put away the telephone and pondered a moment.

Kedzie caught at his arm. "What's the matter? Why don't you
tell me!"

He spoke with a boyish pride of war and a husbandly solemnity: "The
President has called out the National Guard. We're to mobilize to-day
and get to the border as soon as we can. They hope that our regiment
will be the first to move."




CHAPTER XVI

Kedzie's answer was a fierce seizure of him in her arms. She was
palsied with fright for him. She had seen more pictures of dead
soldiers than he knew, and now she saw her man shattered and tortured
with wounds and thirst. She felt in one swift shock what the wives
of Europe had felt by the million. She clung to Jim and sobbed:

"You sha'n't go! I won't let them take you! You belong to me!"

He gathered her awkwardly into his arms and they were more nearly
married then than they had ever been or should ever be again.

The pity of it! that only their separation could bring them
together! Fate is the original Irish-bullster.

Jim tried hurriedly to console Kedzie. He found her hard to make
brave. The early-morningness of the shock, the panic of scattered
sleep, gave her added terror. He had to be cruel at last. Without
intention of humor he said:

"Really, honey, you know you just can't keep the President
waiting."

He tore loose the tendrils of her fingers and ran to his own
dressing-room. She wept awhile, then rose to help accoutre him.
He had his uniform at home still.

In the Grecian simplicity of her nightgown, the very cream of silk,
she might have been Andromache harnessing Hector. Only there was no
baby for him to leave with her, no baby to shrink in fright from
the horsehair crest of the helmet that he did not wear.

When he was all dressed in his olive-drab she still could not let
him go. She held him with her soft arms and twiddled the gun-metal
buttons of his blouse. And when at length she must make an end of
farewells she hugged him with all her might and was glad that the
hard buttons hurt the delicate breast that he felt against him
smotheringly sweet and perilously yielding.

Not knowing how tame the event of all this war-like circumstance was
to prove, he suffered to the deeps of his being the keen ache of
separation that has wrung so many hearts in this eternally battling
world. War, the sunderer, had reached them with his great divorce.

When he was free of her at last she followed him and caught new
kisses. She ran shamelessly barefoot to the door to have the last
of his lips, called good-by to him when the elevator carried him
into the pit, and flung kisses downward after him. Then she stumbled
back to her room and cried aloud. Liliane, her maid, came to help
her and Liliane wept with her, knowing all too well what war could
do to love.

Later Kedzie went to the armory and slipped through the massed crowds
to see Jim again. He was gloriously busy and it stirred her martially
to see his men come up, click heels, salute, report, ask questions,
salute, and retreat again.

A few excited days of recruiting and equipping and then the ceremony
of the muster-in. Jim spent his nights at home, but his terrified
mother and his none too stoical father were there to rival Kedzie
in devotion.

Importance was in the air. There was a stir of history in the public
mood. The flags rippled with a new twinkle of stars and a fiercer
writhing of stripes. The red had the omen of blood.

On the third day there was a ruffle of drums and a crying of brass
on Fifth Avenue. People recalled the great days when the boys in
blue had paraded away to the wars. Only this regiment marched up,
not down, the Avenue. It was the Sixty-ninth, its flagstaff solid
with the silver rings of battle. It was moving north to the
mobilization-camp.

On the ninth day the Seventh went down the Avenue, twelve hundred
strong, to entrain for Texas. The bullets of the foe were not the
only dangers. It was midsummer and these men were bound for the
tropics and the cursed fields of sand where the tarantula, the
rattlesnake, and the scorpion lurked under the cactus.

Jim's mother thought less of the Mexicans than of the fact that
there were no sleeping-cars even for the officers. They would get
them on the way, but it would be a fearsome journey ever southward
into the heat, six days in the troop-trains.

Kedzie was proud of her husband, quite conceited about him, glad
that he was marching instead of standing on the curb. But her heart,
doubled in bulk, pounded against her side like the leaden clapper
of a broken bell.

Jim caught sight of her where she stood on the steps of his father's
house, and her eyes, bright with tears, saddened him. The fond gaze
of his mother touched another well-spring of emotion, and the big,
proud stare of his father another.

But when by chance among the mosaic of faces he saw Charity Coe
there was a sorrow in her look that made him stumble, and his heart
lost step with the music. Somehow it seemed cruelest of all to leave
her there.




CHAPTER XVII

The town was monstrously lonely when Kedzie turned back to her
widowhood. Jim's mother and father and sister were touched by her
grief and begged her to make their home hers, but she shook her
head.

For a while her grief and her pride sustained her. She was the
Spartan wife of the brave soldier. She even took up knitting as
an appropriate activity. She thought in socks.

But the hateful hours kept coming, the nights would not be brief,
and the days would not curtail their length nor quicken their pace.
The loathsome inevitable result arrived.

Even her grief began to bore her. Fidelity grew inane, and her
young heart shrieked aloud for diversion.

If battles had happened down there, if something stirring had only
appeared in the news, she could have taken some refreshment of
excitement from the situation. Heroic demands breed heroes and
heroines, but all that this crisis demanded was the fidelity of
torpor, the loyalty of a mollusk.

Nothing happened except the stupid chronicles of heat and monotony.
The rattlesnakes did not bite; the tarantulas scuttered away; the
scorpions were no worse than wasps. The Mexicans did not attack or
raid or attempt the assassinations which popular hostility accepted
as their favorite outdoor sport. Mexico continued her siesta while
the United States sentineled the bedroom.

Jim's letters told of scorching heat, of blinding duststorms, and
cloudbursts that made lakes of the camps, but nothing else happened
except the welter of routine.

The regiments had only police work to do, and the task grew irksome.
Men began to think of their neglected businesses. The men who stayed
at home were sharing bountifully in the prosperity of the times. The
volunteers at the Border were wasting their abilities for fifteen
dollars a month.

The officers began to resign by the score, by the hundred. As many
enlisted men dropped out as could beg off. Jim could afford to stay;
he would not resign, though Kedzie wrote appeals and finally demands
that he return to his wretched wife.

Resentment replaced sorrow in her heart. She began to impute ugly
motives to his absence. The tradition of the alluring Mexican
senorita obsessed her. She imagined him engaged in wild romances
with sullen beauties. She was worried about guitar music and
stilettoes.

If there were beautiful senoritas there in McAllen, Jim did not see
them. His dissipations were visits to the movie shows and excursions
for dinner to Mr. and Mrs. Riley's hotel at Mission. Liquor was
forbidden to officers and men under dire penalties, and Jim's
conviviality was restricted to the soda-water fountains. He became
as rabid a consumer of ice-cream cones and sundaes as a matinee
girl. It was a burlesque of war to make the angels hold their sides,
if the angels could forget the slaughter-house of Europe.

Jim felt that the Government had buncoed him into this comic-opera
chorus. He resented the service as an incarceration. But he would
not resign. For months he plodded the doleful round of his duties,
ate bad food, poured out unbelievable quantities of sweat and easily
believable quantities of profanity.

On the big practice hike through the wilderness who that saw him
staggering along, choked with alkali dust, knouted by the sun,
stabbed by the cactus, carrying two rifles belonging to worn-out
soldiers in addition to his own load, looking forward to the
privilege of throwing himself down by the roadside for ten minutes'
respite, praying for the arrival in camp with its paradise of a
little shelter tent and beans and bacon for dinner or for breakfast
or supper--who could have believed that he did not have to do it?
That he had indeed at home soft luxuries, a rosy little wife, a
yacht, and servants to lift his shoes from the floor for him?

It was easier, however, for him to get along thus there where
everybody did the same than it was for Kedzie to get along
ascetically in New York where nearly everybody she knew was gay.

She might have gone down to Texas to see Jim, but when he wrote
her how meager the accommodations were and how harsh the comforts,
she pained him by taking his advice. Like almost all the other
wives, she stayed at home and made the best of it.

The best was increasingly bad. Her lot, indeed, was none too
cheerful. After her clandestine marriage she had confronted her
husband's parents, and the result was not satisfactory. She had
had no honeymoon, and her husband's friends were chill toward her.
Then he marched away and left her for half a year.

She was young and pretty and restless. She had acquired a greed
of praise. She had given up her public glory to be her husband's
private prima donna; and then her audience had abandoned her.

Though her soul traveled far in a short time by the calendar, every
metamorphosis was slow and painful and imperceptible. She wept her
eyes dry; then moped until her gloom grew intolerable. The first
diversion she sought was really an effort of her grief to renew
itself by a little repose. Her first amusement was for her grief's
sake. But before long her diversions were undertaken for diversion's
sake.

She had to have friends and she had to take what she could get. The
more earnest elements of society did not interest her, nor she them.
The fast crowd disgusted her at first, but remained the only one
that did not repulse her advances.

Her first glimpses of the revelers filled her with repugnance and
confirmed her in what she had heard and read of the wickedness of
the rich. The fact that she had seen also the virtuous rich, solemn
rich, religious rich, miserly rich, was forgotten. The fact that in
every stage of means there are the same classes escaped her memory.
She had known of middle classes where libertinism flourished, had
known of licentiousness among the poor shopkeepers, shoddy intriguers
in the humble boarding-houses.

But now she felt that money made vice and forgot that vice is one
of the amusements accessible to the very poorest, to all who inherit
flesh and its appetites.

Gradually she forgot her horror of dissipation. The outswirling eddy
of the gayer crowd began to gather and compel her feet. She lacked
the wisdom to attract the intellectuals, the culture to run with
the artistic and musical sets, the lineage to satisfy that curious
few who find a congeniality in the fact that their ancestors were
respectable and recorded persons.

In the fast gang she did not need to have or use her brains. She
did not need a genealogy. Her beauty was her admission-fee. Her
restlessness was her qualification.

Those who were careless of their own behavior were careless of their
accomplices. They accepted Kedzie without scruple. They accepted
especially the invitations she could well afford. She ceased to be
afraid of a compliment. She grew addicted to flattery. She learned
to take a joke off-color and match it in shade.

She met women of malodorous reputation and found that they were not
so black as they had been painted. She learned how warm-hearted and
charitable a woman could be for whom the world had a cold shoulder
and no charity.

She extended her tolerance from men whose escapades had been
national topics to women who had been involved in distinguished
scandals and were busily involving themselves anew. Being tolerant
of them, he had to be tolerant of their ways. Forgiving the sinner
helps to forgive the sin. There are few things more endearing than
forgiveness. One of the most appealing figures in literature and
art is the forgiven woman taken in adultery.

And thus by easy stages and generous concessions Kedzie, who had
begun her second marriage with the strictest ideals of behavior,
found herself surrounded by people of a loose-reined life. Things
once abhorred became familiar, amusing, charming.

It was increasingly difficult to resent advances toward her own
citadel which she had smiled at in others. She grew more and more
gracious toward a narrowing group of men till the safety-in-numbers
approached the peril-in-fewness. She grew more and more gracious
to a widening group of women, and they brought along their men.

Kedzie even forgave Pet Bettany and struck up a friendship with her.
Pet apologized to her other friends for taking up with Kedzie, by
the sufficient plea, "She gives such good food and drink at her
boarding-house."

Kedzie found Pet intensely comforting since Pet was full of gossip
and satirized with contempt the people who had been treating Kedzie
with contempt. It is mighty pleasant to hear of the foibles of our
superiors. The illusion of rising is acquired by bringing things down
to us as well as by rising to them. When Pet told Kedzie something
belittling about somebody big Kedzie felt herself enlarged.

Pet had another influence on Kedzie. Pet was no more contemptuous
of aristocrats than she was of people who were good or tried to be,
or, failing that, kept up a decent pretense.

Pet made a snobbery of vice and had many an anecdote of the lapses
of the respectable and the circumspectable. Her railing way brought
virtue itself into disrepute and Kedzie was frightened out of her
last few senses. She fell under the tyranny of the _risque_,
which is as fell as the tyranny of the prudish.

Prissy Atterbury had told Pet without delay of meeting Jim Dyckman
at Charity's home. Now that Pet was a crony of Kedzie's she recalled
the story. Finding Kedzie one day suffering from an attack of
scruples, and declining to accept an invitation because "Jim might
not like it," Pet laughed:

"Oh, Jim! What right has he got to kick? He didn't lose much time
getting back to his Charity Coe after he married you."

"His Charity Coe!" Kedzie gasped. "What do you mean by his Charity
Coe?"

"Why, his old reliable sweetheart. He's been silly about her since
babyhood. When she married Pete Cheever he moped like a sick hound.
And didn't he beat up Pete in a club only a few days before he
married you?"

This was all news to Kedzie and it sickened her. She demanded more
poison, and Pet ladled it out joyously.

She told Kedzie how Prissy Atterbury found Jim at Charity's home.
But Kedzie remembered vividly that Jim had said he met Charity on
the street. And now she had caught him in a lie, a woman-lie! He
was not there to explain that he visited Charity in Kedzie's behalf,
and if he had explained it would only have embittered her the more.

Being quite convinced now of Jim's perfidy, she denied the
possibility of it.

"Jim's square, I'm sure. There couldn't be anything wrong with him.
And Mrs. Cheever is an awful prig, everybody says."

Pet whooped with laughter: "They're the worst sort. Why, only
a couple of years ago Jim and Charity were up in the Adirondacks
alone together. Prissy Atterbury caught them sneaking back."

So one lie was used to bolster another. The firmest structures can
be thus established by locking together things that will not stand
alone--as soldiers stack arms. Pet went on stacking lies and Kedzie
grew more and more distressed, then infuriated. Her bitterness
against Charity grew the more acid. Charity's good repute became now
the whitewash on a sepulcher of corruption. Her resentment of the
woman's imagined hypocrisy and of her husband's apparent duplicity
blazed into an eagerness for vengeance--the classic vengeance of
punishing a crime by committing another of the sort. Like revenges
like; an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a loyalty for a
loyalty.




CHAPTER XVIII

But now, as often happens in evil as in virtue, Kedzie had the
willingness, but not the resolution. She threw her scruples into
the waste-basket, accepted Pet's invitation, went with her and
her crowd to one of the most reckless dances in Greenwich Village,
where men and women strove to outdo the saturnalia of Montmartre,
vied with one another in exposure, and costumed themselves as
closely according to the fig-leaf era as the grinning policemen
dared to permit.

Kedzie screamed with laughter at some of the ribaldry and danced in
a jostle of fauns, satyrs, nymphs, and maenads. Yet when her partner
clenched her too straitly she could not forget that she was the wife
of an absent soldier. And when on the way home he tried to flirt
she could not quell the nausea in her soul.

But practice makes perfect and Kedzie was learning to be downright
bad, though yet awhile she gave but stingy reward to her assiduous
cavaliers. She was what Pet called a _demi-veuve_ and unprofitable
to the men she used as weapons of her revenge against her innocent
and unwitting husband.

There was another factor working toward her debasement and that was
the emancipation of her pocket-book. It was a fairy's purse now and
she could not scatter her money faster than she found it renewed.
Her entertainments grew more lavish and more reckless. She had an
inspiration at last. She would put Jim's yacht into commission and
take a party of friends on a cruise, well chaperoned, of course.

She sent instructions to the master of the vessel to get steam up.
Knudsen sent back word that he would have to have an order from the
boss. She promised to have him discharged and in her anger fired
a telegram off to Jim, demanding that he rebuke the surly skipper
and order the boat out.

The telegram found Jim in a state of doldrums. The food had turned
against him, homesickness was like a fever in him, and the monotony
of his routine had begun to get his nerves. He was startled and
enraged at Kedzie's request for permission to go yachting and he
fired back a telegram:

  Knudsen was right I am astonished at your suggestion
  do not approve in the slightest.

He regretted his anger when it was too late. Kedzie, who had already
made up her list of guests and received their hilarious acceptances,
was compelled to withdraw the invitations. She would have bought
a yacht of her own, but she could not afford it! She was not allowed
so large a fund. She, Mrs. Dyckman, wanted something and could not
afford it! What was the use of anything, anyhow?

Times had changed for Kedzie indeed when the little beggar from the
candy-store who had cried once when Skip Magruder, the bakery waiter,
refused to take her to the movies twice in one Sunday, was crying
now because her miser of a husband forbade her a turbine yacht as
a plaything.

She was crushed with chagrin and she felt completely absolved of the
last obligation. What kind of a brute had she married who would go
away on a military picnic among his nice, warm cacti and deny his
poor deserted wife a little boat-ride and a breath of fresh air?

If she had had any lingering inclination to visit Jim in Texas she
gave it up now. She went to Newport instead and took Pet Bettany
along for a companion--at Kedzie's expense, of course.

Charity Coe Cheever was visiting Mrs. Noxon again and Kedzie
snubbed her haughtily when she met her at the Casino or on Bailey's
Beach. Kedzie was admitted to that sacred surf of the Spouting Rock
Association now and she was as pretty a naiad as there was.

But now she encountered occasional rebuffs from certain people,
not only because she was common, but because she was reputed to be
fast. When the gossip-peddlers brought her this fierce verdict she
was hardened enough to scorn the respectables as frumps. She grew
a little more impudent than ever and her pout began to take the form
of a sneer.

She lingered in and about Newport till the autumn came. Occasional
excursions on other people's yachts or in her own cars or to
house-parties broke the season, but she loved Newport. Jim's name
had given her entry to places and sets whence nobody quite had the
courage or the authority to dismiss her.

At Newport there was a very handsome fool named Jake Vanderveer,
distantly related to the charming Van-der Veers as well as the Van
der Veers. He was even more distantly related to his own wife at
the time Kedzie met him.

Pet Bettany had told Kedzie what a rotter Mrs. Jake was, and Kedzie
felt awfully sorry for Jakie. So did Jakie. He was sophomoric enough
to talk about his broken heart and she was sophomoric enough to
suffer for him most enjoyably.

A little sympathy is a dangerous thing. Married people run a
great risk unless they keep theirs strictly mutual and for home
consumption.

Jakie said he believed in running away from his grief. Kedzie ran
with him for company. People's tongues ran just as fast. Jakie was
making a lot of money in Wall Street and trying to drown his sorrows
there. Kedzie was thrilled by his jargon of the market and he taught
her how to read the confetti streamers that pour out of the ticker.
Jakie confided to her a great scheme.

"The only way I can keep that wife of mine from spending all my
money is to spend it first."

"You're a genius!" Kedzie said. A woman usually approves almost
any scheme for keeping money away from another woman.

"I'm going to make a killing next week," said Jakie, "and I'm going
just quietly to put a couple of thou. up for my little pal Kedzie.
You can't lose. If you win you can buy yourself five thousand
dollars' worth of popcorn."

Kedzie was enraptured. She would have some money at last that she
didn't have to drag out of her husband. She prayed the Lord for
a rising market.

Then Mrs. Dyckman sent for her. When Kedzie called the servants were
extremely solemn. Kedzie had to wait till the doctor left. He was
very solemn, too.

Kedzie found her mother-in-law in bed. She looked like a small
mountain after a snow-storm. It was strange to Kedzie to find one
so mighty brought low and speaking in so tiny a voice. Her husband
was there and he was haggard with sympathy and alarm, a very elephant
in terror. He was less courteous than usual to Kedzie and he left the
room at his wife's signal. Mrs. Dyckman was more gentle than ever.

"Draw your chair up close, my child," she whispered. "I want to have
a little talk with you and my voice is weak."

Kedzie was alarmed enough to revert to a simple phrase; "I'm awfully
sorry you're sick. Are you very sick?"

"Very. There's such a lot of me, you know. It's disgusting. I've
scared my poor husband to death. I'm glad Jim isn't here to be
worried. I hope I'll not have to send for him. But I'd like to."

Kedzie felt a little quiver of alarm. She did not quite want Jim
to come back just yet. She had grown used to his absence. His return
would deprive poor Jakie of solace.

Mrs. Dyckman took Kedzie's hand and stared at her sadly.

"You're looking a little tired, my dear, if you'll forgive me for
being frank. I'm very old and I very much want you and Jim to win
out. Lying here I take things too anxiously, I suppose, but--I'm
frightened. I don't want my boy and you to go the way so many other
couples do. He's left you because his country needed him, or thought
it did. It wouldn't look well to have him come back and find that
in his absence you had forgotten him. Now, would it?"

"Why, Mrs. Dyckman!" Kedzie gasped, getting her hand away.

Mrs. Dyckman groped for it and took it back. "Don't be vexed. Or if
you must be, pout as you used to. You mustn't grow hard, my child.
Your type of beauty doesn't improve with cynicism. You must think
sweet thoughts or simply be petulant when you're angry. Don't grow
hard! If nothing else will move you let me appeal to your pride.
You are traveling with a hard crowd, a cruel pack, Miss Bettany's
pack, and a silly lot of men like Jake Vanderveer. And you mustn't,
my child. You just mustn't get hard and brazen. Couldn't you give
up Miss Bettany? She's an absolutely unprincipled creature. She's
bad, and you must know it. Don't you?"

Kedzie could not answer, or would not. Mrs. Dyckman's voice grew
poignant.

"I've lived so long and seen so much unhappiness. There is so much
tragedy across the water. My poor daughter has had a cable that her
husband's brother has been killed in France. Her husband has been
wounded; she is sailing back. So many men, so many, many men are
dying. The machine-guns go like scythes all day long, and the poor
fellows lie out there in the shrapnel rain--Oh, it is unbelievable.
And Europe's women are undergoing such endless sorrow; every day
over there the lists contain so many names. So many of Cicely's
friends have perished. Life never was so full of sorrow, my dear,
but it is such a noble sorrow that it seems as if nobody, had any
right to any other kind of sorrow.

"You are young, dear child. You are lonely and restless; but you
don't realize how loathsome it is to other people to see such
recklessness going on over here while such lofty souls are going to
death in droves over there. The sorrow you will bring on yourself
and all of us, and on poor Jim, will be such a hateful sorrow, my
dear, such an unworthy grief!"

Kedzie choked, and mumbled, "I don't think I know what you mean."

Mrs. Dyckman petted her hand: "I don't think you do. I hope not.
But take an old woman's word for it, be--be Caesar's wife?"

"Caesar's wife?" Kedzie puzzled. "What did she do?"

"It was what she didn't do. Well, I haven't the strength--or the
right, perhaps--to tell you any more. Yes, I will. I must say this
much. You are the subject of very widespread criticism, and Jim
is being pitied."

"Me criticized? Jim pitied? Why? For what?"

"For the things you do, my dear, the places you go, and the hours
you keep--and the friends you keep."

"That's disgusting!" Kedzie snarled. "The long-tongued gossips!
They ought to be ashamed of themselves."

Mrs. Dyckman's fever began to mount. She dropped Kedzie's hand
and tugged at the coverlet.

"You'd better go, my dear. I apologize. It's useless! When did age
ever gain anything by warning youth? I'm an old fool, and you're
a young one. And nothing will stop your ambition to run through
life to the end of it and get all you can out of it."

Kedzie felt dismissed and rose in bewildered anger. Mrs. Dyckman
heaved herself to one elbow and pointed her finger at Kedzie.

"But keep away from Jake Vanderveer! and Pet Bettany! or--or--Send
my nurse, please."

She fell back gasping and Kedzie flew, in a fear that the old lady
would die of a stroke and Kedzie be blamed for it forever. Kedzie
was so blue and terrified that she had to send for Jake Vanderveer
to keep from going crazy. He told her that the market was still on
the climb, and that her sympathy had saved his life. He had been
desperate enough for suicide when he met her, and now he was one
of the rising little suns of finance.

Mrs. Dyckman did not die, but she did not get well, and Jim's
father wrote him that he'd better resign and come home. It would do
his mother a world of good, and he was doing the country no good
down there.

Jim was alarmed; he wrote out his resignation and submitted it to
his colonel, who showed him a new order from the War Department
announcing that no more resignations would be accepted except on
the most urgent grounds. Idleness was destroying the Guard faster
than a campaign. Jim returned to the doldrums with a new resentment.
He was a prisoner now.

He had gone to Texas to find war and his wife to Newport to find
gaiety. She found much more than that. On October 7th the old town
was stirred by something genuinely new in sensations--the arrival
of a German war submarine, the U-53.




THE FOURTH BOOK

THE MARCHIONESS HAS QUALMS




CHAPTER I

A freight submarine, the _Bremen_, had recently excited
the wonderment of a world jaded with miracles by crossing from
Helgoland to Norfolk with a cargo. But here was a war-ship that
dived underneath the British blockade.

The dead of the Lusitania were still unrequited and unburied, but
the Germans had graciously promised President Wilson to sink no
more passenger-ships without warning, and they had been received
back into the indulgence of the super-patient neutrals.

And now came the under-sea boat to test American hospitality. It was
received with amazed politeness and the news flew through Newport,
bringing the people flocking like children. An American submarine
conducted its guest to anchorage. Mail for the ambassador was put
ashore and courtesy visits were exchanged with the commandant of the
Narragansett Bay Naval Station. In three hours the vessel, not to
overstay the bounds of neutral hospitality, returned to the ocean.

A flotilla of American destroyers convoyed it outside and calmly
watched while the monster halted nine ships off Nantucket, graciously
permitted their crews and passengers to take themselves, but no
belongings, into open boats; then torpedoed the vessels one after
another.

The destroyers of the United States Navy stood by like spectators on
the bleachers, and when the submarine had quite finished the supply
of ships the obliging destroyers picked up the fragments in the open
boats and brought them ashore. And the U-53 went on unchecked, after
one of the most astounding spectacles in the history of the sea.

Charity Coe and other women waited on the docks till midnight
arranging refuge for more than two hundred victims. It was a novel
method for getting into Newport mansions. Even Kedzie took in an
elderly couple. She tried to get a few young men, but they were
all taken.

The next morning there was a panic in Wall Street and nearly two
million shares were flung overboard, with a loss of five hundred
million dollars in market values. Marine insurance-rates rose from
a hundred to five hundred per cent. and it seemed that our ocean
trade would be driven from the free seas. But everything had been
done according to the approved etiquette for U-boats, and there
was not even an official protest.

Once more the Germans announced that they had wrecked the British
naval supremacy, as in the battle of Jutland, after which glorious
victory the German fleet appeared no more in the North Sea.

Nor was there any check in the throngs of merchant-vessels shuttling
the ocean for the Allies. And that disgusted the Germans. Their
promises to Mr. Wilson irked them. They lusted again for their old
policy of "ruthlessness"; "_Schrecklichkeit_" joined "_Gott
strafe_" in familiar speech, and Germany added America to her
"Hymn of Hate." Strange, that among all the warring peoples the one
nation that went to battle with the most fervent religious spirit,
even putting "_Gott mit uns_" on the uniforms of its soldiers,
that nation contributed to the slang of the day no nobler phrases
than "_Schrecklichkeit_" and "_strafe_" and the equivalents
of "scrap of paper" and "Hymn of Hate."

All this meant little to Kedzie except that Jakie Vanderveer, who had
been her devoted squire for some time, was caught and ruined in the
market slump. Otherwise he might have ruined Kedzie, for he had been
dazzling her more and more with his lavish courtship. When he lost
his money he left Newport and Kedzie never knew how narrow an escape
she had. She only knew that she did not make the money he promised
to make for her. She said that war was terrible.

A pious soul would have credited Providence with the rescue. But
Providence had other plans. One of the victims of the U-53 was a
young English aviator, the Marquess of Strathdene. If the U-53
had not sunk the ship that carried him Kedzie would have had an
exceedingly different future.

Strathdene had been a spendthrift, a libertine, and a loafer till
the war shook England. He had been well shaken, too, and unsuspected
emotions were aroused. He had learned to fly and insulted the law
of gravity with the same impudence he had shown for the laws of
morality.

In due time he was joined to an air squadron. He risked his life
every moment he was aloft, but the danger became a negligible thing
in the thrill of the liveliest form of big-game hunting thus far
known to man. In mid-sky he stalked his prey and was stalked by it;
he chased German Taubes or was chased by them into clouds and out of
them, up hill and down dale in ether-land amid the showers from below
of the raining aircraft guns. Strathdene knew how to dodge and duck,
turn somersaults, volplane, spiral, coast downward on an invisible
toboggan-slide, or climb into heaven on an airy stair.

The sky was full of such flocks; the gallant American gentlemen
who made up the Escadrille Lafayette went clouding with him, and
Mr. Robert Lorraine, the excellent actor, and Mr. Vernon Castle,
the amiable revolutionist of the dance, and many and many another
eagle heart. Strathdene scouted valuably during the first battle
of the Somme, his companion working the gun or the camera or the
bomb-dropping lever as the need might be.

And then one day a burst of shrapnel from the remote earth shattered
his plane and him. A slug of iron went upward through his hip and
another nicked off a bit of his shoulder. But he brought his wounded
machine safely to earth and toppled into the arms of the hospital
aids; went backward in a motor-ambulance to a receiving-station, then
back in a train, then across the Channel, then across the ocean in
a steamer to be sunk by a submarine and brought ashore in a lifeboat.
Strathdene had pretty well tested the modern systems of vehicular
transportation.

The surgeons mended his wounds, but his nerves had felt the shrapnel.
That was why the sea voyage had been advised. Strathdene seemed to
have a magnetic gift for adventure. An aircraft gun brought him down
from the clouds and a submersible ship came up from the deeps to have
a try at him. Before long Kedzie would be saying that fate had taken
all this trouble just to bring him and her together.

In the transfer from the ship to the lifeboat Strathdene's wounds
were wrenched and his sufferings renewed. He was lucky enough to
fall into the hands of Charity Coe Cheever. She was a war nurse
of experience, and he was soon well enough to try to flirt with
her. But she had been experienced also in the amorous symptoms of
convalescent soldiers and she repressed his ardor skilfully. She
put an ice-cap on his heart and head.

As soon as he was up and about again he met Kedzie. It seemed to
be her business to take away from Charity Coe all of Charity's
conquests, and the young Marquess found her hospitable to his
hunger for friendship.

Before the first day's acquaintance was over Kedzie was as fascinated
by his chatter as Desdemona was by Othello's anecdotes.

One night Kedzie dreamed that she was a Marquessess or whatever
the wife of a Marquess would be styled.

Kedzie was herself again. Kedzie was dreaming again. She had an
ambition for something higher than her station. She made haste to
encourage the infatuated Marquess. Counting upon winning him somehow
as her husband, she gave him encouragement beyond any she had given
her other swains.

But Strathdene had no intention of marrying her or any other woman.
His heart was in the highlands, the cloudlands; his heart was not
there.

A purer patriot or a warrior more free of any taint of caution than
Strathdene could not be imagined, but otherwise he was as arrant
a scamp as ever. While he waited for strength to "carry on" in the
brave, new, English sense, it amused him to "carry on" in the
mischievous old American sense.

Kedzie was determined that he should live long enough for her to
free herself from Jim and make the marquisate hers. She seemed to be
succeeding. She found Strathdene as easy of fascination as her old
movie audiences had been. He even tried to write poetry about her
pout; but he was a better rider on an aeroplane than on Pegasus.

Kedzie was soon wishing for Jim's return, since she could not see how
to divorce him till he appeared. She tried to frame a letter asking
for her release, but it was not easy writing. She felt that she
would have a better chance of success if Jim were within wheedling
distance. But Jim remained away, and Kedzie grew fonder and fonder
of her Marquess, and he of her.

Perhaps they were really mated, their pettinesses and selfishnesses
peculiarly complemental. In any case, they were mutually bewitched.

Their dalliance became the talk of Newport. Everybody believed that
what was bad enough at best was even worse than it was. Charity Coe
heard the couple discussed everywhere. She was distressed on Jim's
account. And now she found herself in just the plight that had
tortured Jim when he knew that Peter Cheever was disloyal to Charity
and longed to tell her, but felt the duty too odious. So Charity
pondered her own obligation. She was tempted to write Jim an
anonymous letter, but had not the cowardice. She was tempted to
write to him frankly, but had not the courage. She did at last what
Jim had done--nothing.

Jim's mother had heard of Vanderveer's disappearance from Kedzie's
entourage and she had improved with hope. When she learned that
Strathdene was apparently infatuated she grew worse and telegraphed
Jim to ask for a leave of absence. She did not tell Kedzie of her
telegram or of Jim's answer.

Pet Bettany flatly accused Kedzie of being guilty, and referred to
the Marquess as her paramour. When Kedzie furiously resented her
insolence Pet laughed.

"The more fool you, if you carry the scandal and lose the fun."

Kedzie was more afraid of Pet's contempt than of a better woman's.
She began to think herself a big fool for not having been a bigger
one. She fell into an altogether dangerous mood and she could no
longer save herself. She almost prayed to be led into temptation.
The unuttered prayer was speedily answered.

She went motoring with Strathdene late one night in a car he had
hired. When he ventured to plead with her not to go back to her home
where her servants provided a kind of chaperonage, she made only
a formal protest or two. He stopped at a roadside inn, a secluded
place well known for its unquestioning hospitality.

Strathdene, tremulous with victory, led Kedzie to the dining-room
for a bit of sup and sip. The landlord escorted them to a nook in
a corner and beckoned a waiter. Kedzie was studying the bill of fare
with blurred and frightened vision when she heard the footsteps of
the waiter plainly audible in the quiet room. They had a curious
rhythm. There was a hitch in the step, a skip.

Her heart stopped as if it had run into a tree. The "skip" brought
down on her soul a whole five-foot shelf of remembrances of her first
New York love-affair with the lame waiter in the bakery. All her good
fortune had been set in motion by poor, old, shabby "Skip." She had
soared away like some rainbow-hued bubble gently releasing itself
from the day pipe that inflated it out of the suds of its origin.

Kedzie had learned to be ashamed of Skip as long ago as when she was
a Greek dancer. She had not seen or heard of him since she sent him
the insulting answer to his stage-door note. And now he had saved
himself up for a ruinous reappearance when she was in the company
of a Marquess--and on such an errand!

What on earth was Skip doing so far from the Bronx and in the
environs of Newport, of all places? It occurred to Kedzie that
Skip might ask her the same question.




CHAPTER II

The terror his footsteps inspired was confirmed by the unforgetable
voice that came across her icy shoulder-blades. He slapped the china
and silver down with the familiar bravura of a quick-lunch waiter,
and her heart sank, remembering that she had once admired his skill.

The Marquess looked up at him with a glare of rebuke as Skip posed
himself patiently with one hand, knuckles down, on the table, the
other on his hip, and demanded, with misplaced enthusiasm:

"Well, folks, what's it goin' to be?"

The Marquess had been somewhat democratized by his life in the army,
and, being a true Briton, he always expected the worst in America.
He proceeded to order a light supper that would not take too long.
Skip crushed him by saying:

"Ain't the little lady takin' nothin'?"

Kedzie was afraid to speak. She put her finger on the menu at a
chafing-dish version of chicken, and the Marquess added it to his
order. Skip shuffled away without recognizing Kedzie. She waited
only for his exit to make her own.

It was terrifying enough to realize that the moment Skip caught
a glimpse of her he would hail her noisily and tell the Marquess
all about her. There still lingered in Kedzie a little more honesty
than snobbery and she felt even less dread of being "bawled out" by
a waiter in the presence of a Marquess than of having Skip Magruder
know that she was in such a place even with a Marquess. Skip had
been good to her and had counseled her to go straight.

She felt no gratitude toward him now, but she could not face his
contempt. That would be degradation beneath degradation. She was
disgusted with everything and everybody, including herself. The
glamour of the escapade was dissipated. The excitement of an illicit
amour so delicious in so many farces, so tenderly dramatic in so
many novels, had curdled. She saw what an ugly business she was in
and she was revolted.

Kedzie waited only to hear the swinging door whiff after Skip's
syncopated feet, then she whispered sharply across the table to
the Marquess:

"Take me out of this awful place. I don't know what I'm doing here.
I won't stay! not a moment!"

"But we've ordered--"

"You stay and eat, then. I won't stop here another minute!"

She rose. She smothered the Marquess's protests about the
awkwardness, the ludicrousness of such a flight.

"What will the waiter think?" he asked, being afraid of a waiter,
though of no one else.

Kedzie did not care what the waiter thought, so long as he did not
know whom he thought it of. Strathdene gave the headwaiter a bill
and followed Kedzie out. He was hungry, angry, and puzzled.

Skip Magruder never knew what a chaperon he had been. If Providence
managed the affair it chose an odd instrument, and intervened, as
usual, at the last moment. Providence would save itself a good deal
of work if it came round a little earlier in these cases. Perhaps it
does and finds nobody awake.

Strathdene demanded explanations. Kedzie told him truth but not
all of it.

"It suddenly swept over me," she gasped, "how horrible it was
for me to be there."

She wept with shame and when he would have consoled her she kept him
aloof. The astonishing result of the outing was that both came home
better. It suddenly swept over Strathdene that Kedzie was innocenter
than he had dreamed. She was good! By gad! she was good enough to be
the wife even of a Strathdene. He told Kedzie that he wished to God
he could marry her. She answered fervently that she wished to God he
could.

He asked her "You don't really love that Dyckman fella, do you?"

"I don't really love anybody but you," said Kedzie. "You are the
first man I have really truly loved."

She meant it and it may have been true. She said it with sincerity
at least. One usually does. At any rate, it sounded wonderful to
Strathdene and he determined to make her his. He would let England
muddle along somehow till he made this alliance with the beautiful
Missourienne. But Kedzie's plight was again what it had been; she
had a husband extra. In some cases the husband is busy enough with
his own affairs to let the lover trot alongside, like the third
horse which the Greeks called the _pareoros_. But neither Jim
nor Strathdene would be content with that sort of team-work, and
Kedzie least of all.

She and Strathdene agreed that love would find the way, and Kedzie
suggested that Jim would probably be decent enough to arrange the
whole matter. He had an awfully clever lawyer, too.

Strathdene had braved nearly every peril in life except marriage.
He was determined to take a shy at that. He and Kedzie talked their
honeymoon plans with the boyishness and girlishness of nineteen
and sixteen.

Then Kedzie remembered Gilfoyle. She had thanked her stars that she
told Dyckman the truth about him in time. And now she was confronted
with the same situation. Since her life was repeating its patterns,
it would be foolish to ignore the lessons. So after some hesitation
she told the Marquess that Jim Dyckman was not her first, but her
second. She told it very tragically, made quite a good story of it.

But the Marquess had been intrepid enough to laugh when, out of a
large woolly cloud a mile aloft, a German flying-machine had suddenly
charged him at a hundred miles an hour. He was calm enough now to
laugh at the menace of Kedzie's past rushing out of the pink cloud
about her.

"The more the merrier," he said. "The third time's the charm."

He sighed when he was alone and thought it rather shabby that Cupid
should land him at last with a second-handed, a third-hearted arrow.
But, after all, these were war times and Economy was the universal
watchword. The arrow felt very cozy.




CHAPTER III

Unselfishness is an acquired art. Children rarely have it. That is
why the Greeks represented love of a certain kind as a boy, selfish,
treacherous, ingratiating, blind to appearances, naif, gracefully
ruthless.

Kedzie and Strathdene were enamoured of each other. They were both
zealots for experience, restless and reckless in their zest of life.
As soon as they were convinced of their love, every restraint became
an illegal restraint, illegal because they felt that only the law of
love had jurisdiction over them.

When Kedzie received a telegram from Jim that he had secured a leave
of absence for thirty days and would be in Newport in four she felt
cruelly used. She forgot how she had angled for Jim and hustled him
into matrimony.

She was afraid of him now. She thought of him as many women in
captured cities once regarded and have recently again regarded
the triumphing enemy as one who would count beauty the best part
of the booty.

Her loyalty to Strathdene was compromised, her delicacy was
horrified. She was distraught with her plight.

She had to tell the news to Strathdene and he went into frenzies of
jealousy. She had pledged herself to be his as soon as she could lift
the Dyckman mortgage. If a man is ever going to be jealous he should
certainly find occasion for the passion when he is betrothed to the
wife of a returning soldier. Strathdene ought to have been on his way
back to the aviation-camp, but he had earned the right to humor his
nerves, and Kedzie was testing them beyond endurance.

It was a tragical-comical dilemma for Kedzie. Even she, with her
gift for self-forgiveness, could not quite see how she was to
explain prettily to her husband that in his absence she had fallen
in love with another man. Wives are not supposed to fall in love
while their husbands are at the wars. It has been done, but it is
hard to prettify.

Kedzie beat her forehead in vain for a good-looking explanation. She
was still hunting one when Jim came back. He telegraphed her that he
would come right through to Newport, and asked her to meet him at
the train. She dared not refuse. She simply could not keep her glib
promises to Strathdene. It seemed almost treason to the country for
a wife to give her warrior a cold welcome after his tropical service.
She met him at the Newport station. He was still in uniform. He had
taken no other clothes to Texas with him and had not stopped to buy
any. He was too anxious about his mother to pause in New York. He
had telegraphed his tailor to fit him out and his valet to pack his
things and bring them to Newport.

Kedzie found him very brown and gaunt, far taller even than she
remembered. She was more afraid of him than ever. Strathdene was
only a little taller than she. She was afraid to tell Jim that she
was another's.

But she made a poor mimicry of perfect bliss. Jim was not critical.
She was more beautiful than he remembered her. He told her so, and
she was flattered by his courtship, miserably treacherous as she
felt.

She was proud to be a soldier's wife. She was jealous now of his
concern for his mother. He had to go see her first. He was surprised
to learn that Kedzie was not living with her. His mother had begun
to improve from the moment she had Jim's telegram. But her eyes on
Kedzie were terrible.

Jim did not notice the tension. He was too happy. He was sick of
soldiering. His old uniform was like a convict's stripes. He was
childishly ambitious to get into long trousers again. For nearly
half a year he had buttoned his breeches at the knee and housed
his calves in puttees and his feet in army brogans.

It was like a Christmas morning among new toys for him to put on
mufti, and take it off. A bath-tub full of hot water was a paradise
regained. Evening clothes with a big white shirt and a top-hat were
robes of ascension. But the clothes made to his old measurements
were worlds too wide for his shrunk shanks. He had lost tons, he
said, in Texas.

Before daybreak the first morning he terrified his cellmate, Kedzie,
by starting up in his sleep with a gasp: "Was that reveille? My God,
I'll be late!"

The joy of finding himself no longer in a tent and of falling back
on his pillow was worth the bad dream. Life was one long bad dream
to Kedzie. She was guilty whichever way she turned, and afraid of
both men.

Jim had a valet to wait on him. He had the problem of selecting his
scarf and his socks for the morning. Jim had come into a lot of
money. He had been earning a bank clerk's salary, with no way of
spending it. And now he had a bank to spend and a plenty of places
to throw it.

But it was hard for him to believe that he was a free man again.
He was amazed to find Newport without cactus and without a scorpion.
He kept looking for a scorpion on his pillow. He found one there,
but did not recognize her.

Jim was as much of a parvenu in Newport as Kedzie had ever been. He
swept her away at times by his juvenile enthusiasm and she neglected
Strathdene atrociously for a week.

A large part of the colony had decamped for New York and Boston and
Chicago, but those that remained made a throng for Jim. His mother
was not well enough to be moved back to New York, but his sister
had reached England safely and he was happy in his luxuries.

But he was the only one that was. His mother was bitter against
Kedzie for having fed the gossips. Kedzie was assured that life
with Jim had nothing new to offer and she resented him as a barrier
between herself and the glory of her future with Strathdene and
"the stately homes of England."

Her mother and father arrived in Newport. Kedzie tried to suppress
them for fear that Strathdene might feel that they were the last
two back-breaking straws. But she needed a confidante and she told
her mother the situation.

Mrs. Thropp, like Kedzie, had an ambition that expanded as fast as
opportunity allowed. She was dazzled by the thought of being elevated
to the peerage. She supposed it made her a relative of royalty. She
who had once dreamed of being neighborly with the great Mrs. Dyckman
was now imagining herself exchanging crocheting formulas with Queen
Mary. She was saying she had always heard the Queen well spoke of.
And Adna Thropp spoke very highly of "George."

They agreed that it was their sacred duty to place the name of
Thropp as high as it could go, cost what it would.

"After all," said Adna one day, looking up from an article in a
Sunday paper--"after all, why ain't Thropp as likely a name as
Wettin? Or Hohenzollern? And what was Romanoff but an ordinary
family once?"

The only thing that seemed to stand in Kedzie's way was the odious
name of Dyckman.

"What's Dyckman, anyway?" said Mrs. Thropp. "Nothin' but a common
old Dutch name."

But how to shake it off was the problem. Kedzie had to cling to
Strathdene with one hand while she tried to release herself from
the Dyckmans with the other.

She had a dreadful feeling that she might lose them both if she
were not exceedingly careful and exceedingly lucky.

Help came to her unexpectedly from Charity Coe, unexpectedly,
though Charity was always helping Kedzie.




CHAPTER IV

Charity Coe had been tormented by the spectacle of her friend's wife
flirting recklessly with the young Marquess of Strathdene while her
husband was at the Border with the troops. But she was far more
sharply wrung when she saw Kedzie flirting with her husband, playing
the devoted wife with all her might and getting away with it to
perfection.

There is hardly anything our eyes bring us that is more hideous
than known disloyalty successfully masquerading as fidelity. The
Judas kiss is not to be surpassed in human detestation.

With almost all the world in uniform, Newport welcomed the sight
of one of her own men returned even from what was rather a siesta
than a campaign, and old Mrs. Noxon insisted on giving a big party
for Jim. She insisted so strongly that Kedzie did not dare refuse,
though she had vowed never to step inside the grounds where she had
made her Newport debut as a hired nymph.

Charity tried to escape by alleging a journey to New York, but
Mrs. Noxon browbeat her into staying. Charity did not know that
Strathdene was invited till she saw him come in with the crowd.
Neither did Kedzie. Old Mrs. Noxon may have invited him for spite
against Kedzie or just as an international courtesy to the most
distinguished foreigner in town.

She introduced Jim and the Marquess, saying, "You great warriors
should know each other."

Jim felt sheepish because he had been to no war and Strathdene
felt sheepish because Jim was so much taller than he. He looked up
at him as Napoleon looked enviously up at men who had no glory but
their altitude. Strathdene was also sheepish because Jim said, very
simply:

"Do you know my wife?"

If he had not been so tall that he saw only the top of Kedzie's
coiffure he would have seen that her face was splashed with red.
She mumbled something while Strathdene stammered, "Er--yes--I have
had that privilege." He felt a sinking sensation as deadly as when
he had his first fall at the aviation school.

Kedzie dragged Jim away and paid violent attention to him all
through dinner. Her sympathy was entirely for her poor Strathdene.
She was afraid he would commit suicide or return to England without
her, and she could not imagine how to get rid of Jim. Then she
caught sight of Charity Coe, and greeted her with a smile of
sincere delight.

For once Kedzie loved Charity. Suddenly it came upon her what a
beautiful solution it would be for everybody if Jim could take
Charity and leave Kedzie free to take Strathdene. She told herself
that Jim would be ever so much happier so, for the poor fellow
would suffer terribly when he found that his Kedzie really could
not pretend to love him any longer. Kedzie felt quite tearful over
it. She was an awfully good-hearted little thing. To turn him over
to Charity would be a charming arrangement, perfectly decent, and
no harm to anybody. If only the hateful laws did not forbid the
exchange--dog-on 'em, anyway!

The more Kedzie studied Charity the more suitable she seemed as
a successor. Her heart warmed to her and she forced an opportunity
to unload Jim on Charity immediately after dinner.

There was music for the encouragement of conversation, an
expensively famous prima donna and a group of strings brought
down from the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

The prima donna sang Donna Elvira's ferocious aria full of
indignation at discovering Don Giovanni's Don Juanity.

Charity, noting that Kedzie had flitted straight to Strathdene and
was trying to appease his cold rage, felt an envy of the prima donna,
who was enabled to express her feelings at full lung power with the
fortissimo reinforcement of several powerful musicians. The primeval
woman in Charity longed for just such a howling prerogative, but the
actual Charity was so cravenly well-bred that she dared not even say
to her dearest friend, "Jim, old man, you ought to go over and wring
the neck of that little cat of yours."

Jim sat beaming at Kedzie and Kedzie beamed back while she murmured
sweet everythings to her little Marquess. Jim seemed to imagine that
he had left her in such a pumpkin shell as Mr. Peter P. Pumpkineater
left his wife in, and kept her so very well. But Kedzie was not that
kind of kept or keepable woman.

Jim would have expected that if Kedzie were guilty of any spiritual
corruption it would show on her face. People will look for such
things. But she was still young and pretty and ingenuous and seemed
incapable of duplicity. And indeed such treachery was no more
than a childish turning from one toy to another. The traitors and
traitresses have no more sense of obligation than a child feels
for a discarded doll.

Jim paid Charity the uncomfortable compliment of feeling enough at
home with her to say, "Well, Charity, that little wife of mine takes
to the English nobility like a duck seeing its first pond, eh?"

"She seems to be quite at her ease," was all that Charity could
say. Now she felt herself a sharer in the wretched intrigue,
as treacherous as Kedzie, no better friend than Kedzie was wife,
because with a word she could have told Jim what he ought to have
known, what he was almost the only person in the room that did
not know. Yet her jaw locked and her tongue balked at the mere
thought of telling him. She protected Kedzie, and not Jim; felt
it abominable, but could not brave the telling.

She resolved that she would rather brave the ocean and get back
to Europe where there were things she could do.

The support of all the French orphans she had adopted had made
deep inroads in her income, but her conscience felt the deeper
inroads of neglected duty.

It was like Charity to believe that she had sinned heinously when
she had simply neglected an opportunity for self-sacrifice. When
other people applauded their own benevolence if they said, "How
the soldiers must suffer! Poor fellows!" Charity felt ashamed if
her sympathy were not instantly mobilized for action.

A great impatience to be gone rendered her suddenly frantic. While
she encouraged Jim to talk of his experiences in Texas she was
making her plans to sail on the first available boat.

If the boat were sunk by a submarine or a mine, death in the
strangling seas would be preferable to any more of this drifting
among the strangling problems of a life that held no promise of
happiness for her. She felt gagged with the silence imposed upon
her by the code in the very face of Kedzie's disloyalty, a
disloyalty so loathsome that seeing was hardly believing.

It seemed inconceivable that a man or woman pledged in holy matrimony
could ever be tempted to an alien embrace. And yet she knew dozens
of people who made a sport of infidelity. Her own husband had found
temptation stronger than his pledge. She wondered how long he would
be true to Zada, or she to him. Charity had suffered the disgrace of
being insufficient for her husband's contentment, and now Jim must
undergo the same disgrace with Kedzie. It was a sort of post-nuptial
jilt.

Of course Charity had no proof that Kedzie had been more than
brazenly indiscreet with Strathdene, but that very indifference
to gossip, that willingness to stir up slander, seemed so odious
that nothing could be more odious, not even the actual crime.

Besides, Charity found it hard to assume that a woman who held
her good name cheap would hold her good self less cheap, since
reputation is usually cherished longer than character.

In any case, Charity was smothering. Even Mrs. Noxon's vast
drawing-room was too small to hold her and Jim and Kedzie and
Strathdene. America was too strait to accommodate that jangling
quartet.

She rose abruptly, thrust her hand out to Jim and said:

"Good night, old man. I've got to begin packing."

"Packing for where? New York?"

"Yes, and then France."

"I've told you before, I won't let you go."

And then it came over him that he had no right even to be dejected
and alarmed at Charity's departure. Charity felt in the sudden
relaxing of his handclasp some such sudden check. She smiled
patiently and went to tell Kedzie good night.

Kedzie broke out, "Oh, don't go--yet!" then caught herself. She also
for quite a different reason must not regret Charity's departure.
Charity smiled a smile of terrifying comprehension, shook her head,
and went her ways.

And now Jim, released, wandered over and sat down by Kedzie just
as she was telling Strathdene the most important things.

She could not shake Jim. He would not talk to anybody else. She
wished that Charity had taken Jim with her. Strathdene was as
comfortable as a spy while Jim talked. Jim seemed so suspiciously
amiable that Strathdene wondered how much he knew.

Jim did not look like the sort of man who would know and be
complacent, but even if he were ignorant Strathdene was too
outright a creature to relish the necessity for casual chatter
with the husband of his sweetheart.

He, too, made a resolution to take the first boat available. He
would rather see a submarine than be one.

Strathdene also suddenly bolted, saying: "Sorry, but I've got to
run myself into the hangar. My doctor says I'm not to do any night
flying."

And now Kedzie was marooned with Jim. She was in a panic about
Strathdene; a fantastic jealousy assailed her. To the clandestine
all things are clandestine! What if he were hurrying away to meet
Charity? Charity returned to Kedzie's black books, and Jim joined
her there.

"Let's go home," said Kedzie, in the least honeymoony of tones.

Jim said, "All right, but why the sudden vinegar?"

"I hate people," said Kedzie.

"Are husbands people?" said Jim.

"Yes!" snapped Kedzie.

She smiled beatifically as she wrung Mrs. Noxon's hand and perjured
herself like a parting guest. And that was the last smile Jim saw
on her fair face that night.

He wondered why women were so damned unreasonably whimsical. They
may be damned, but there is usually a reason for their apparent
whims.




CHAPTER V

The next day Kedzie was still cantankerous, as it was perfectly
natural that she should be. She wanted to be a Marchioness and sail
away to the peerful sky. And she could not cut free from her anchor.
The Marquess was winding up his propeller to fly alone.

Jim, finding her the poorest of company, called on his mother. She
was well enough to be very peevish. So he left her and wandered about
the dull town. He had no car with him and he saw a racer that caught
his fancy. It had the lean, fleet look of a thoroughbred horse, and
the dealer promised that it could triple the speed limit. He went
out with a demonstrator and the car made good the dealer's word. It
ran with such zeal that Jim was warned by three different policemen
on the Boston Post Road that he would be arrested the next time he
came by in such haste.

He decided to try it out again at night on other roads. He told the
dealer to fill up the tank and see to the lights. The dealer told
the garage man and the garage man said he would.

That evening at dinner Jim invited Kedzie to take a spin. She said
that she had to spend the evening with her mother, who was miserable.
Jim said, "Too bad!" and supposed that he'd better run in and say
"Howdy-do" to the poor soul. Kedzie hastily said that she would be
unable to see him. She would not even let Jim ride her over in his
new buzz-wagon.

Again he made the profane comment to himself that women are
unreasonable. Again this statement was due to ignorance of an
excellent reason.

Kedzie had tried all day to get in touch with Strathdene. When she
ran him down at length by telephone he was dismally dignified and
terrifyingly patriotic. His poor country needed him and he must
return.

This meant that Kedzie would lose her first and doubtless her last
chance at the marquisate. She pleaded for a conference. He assented
eagerly, but the problem was where to confer. She dared not invite
him to the house she had rented, for Jim would be there. She could
not go to Strathdene's rooms at the Hilltop Inn. She thought of the
apartment she had stowed her mother in, and asked him there. Then
she telephoned her mother to suppress dad and keep out of sight.

She was afraid to have Jim take her to her mother's address lest her
woeful luck should bring Strathdene and Jim together at the door.
That was her excellent reason for rebuffing her husband's courtesy
and setting out alone.

Her mother was only too willing to abet Kedzie's forlorn hope. It
was the forlornness of Kedzie that saved her. When Strathdene saw
her in her exquisite despair he was helpless. He was no Hun to break
the heart of so sweet a being, and he believed her when she told him
that she would die if he tried to cross the perilous ocean without
her. She told him that she would throw herself on Jim's mercy the
next day and implore her freedom. He would not refuse her, she
assured him, for Jim was really awfully generous, whatever faults
he might have.

Strathdene could well believe that she would have her way with her
husband since he found her absolutely irresistible himself. The
conference lasted long, and they parted at last as Romeo and Juliet
would have parted if Juliet had been married to the County Paris
before Romeo met her.

Kedzie even promised Strathdene that she would not wait till the
morning, but would at once demand her husband's consent to the
divorce. It was only on such an understanding that Strathdene could
endure to intrust his delicate treasure to the big brute's keeping.

Kedzie entered her home with her oration all primed. But Jim was
not there. He did not come home that night. Kedzie's anxiety was
not exactly flattering, but it was sincere.

She wondered if some accident had befallen him in his new car.
She really could not bear the thought of losing another husband by
a motor accident. Suppose he should just be horribly crippled. Then
she could never divorce him.

She hated her thoughts, but she could not be responsible for them.
Her mind was like a lighthouse in a storm. It was not to blame for
what wild birds the winds brought in from the black to dash against
her soul.

But Jim was neither killed nor crippled. The cards still ran
for Kedzie.




CHAPTER VI

Speaking of cards, Jim was like a gambler with a new pack of them
and nobody to play with.

He darted hither and yon in his racer, childishly happy in its
paces, childishly lonely for somebody to show off before. As he
ran along the almost deserted sea road he passed the Noxon home.

He knew that Charity was visiting there. He wondered which of the
lighted windows was hers. After much backing and filling he turned
in and ran up to the steps. He got out and was about to ring the
bell when he heard a piano. He went along the piazza to a window,
and, peering in, saw Charity playing. She was alone in the
music-room and very sadly beautiful.

He tapped on the window. She was startled, rose to leave the room.
He tapped again, remembering an old signal they had had as boy and
girl lovers. She paused. He could see her smile tenderly. She came
forward to the window and stared out. He stared in. Only a pane of
glass parted the tips of their flattened noses. It was a sort of
sterilized Eskimo kiss.

The window was a door. Charity opened it and invited Jim in,
wondering but strangely comforted. He invited her out. He explained
about his gorgeous new car and his loneliness and begged her to
take the air.

She put back her hands to indicate her inappropriate costume,
a flimsy evening gown of brilliant color.

"Mrs. Noxon has gone out to dinner. I was to go with her, but I
begged off. I'm going to New York to-morrow, and I was blue and--"

"And so am I. I've got an extra coat in my car, and the night
is mild."

"No, I'd better not."

"Aw, come along!"

"No-o--"

"Yes!"

"All right. I'll get a veil for my hair."

She closed the French window and hurried away. She reappeared at
the front door and shut it stealthily after her.

"Nobody saw me go. You must get me back before Mrs. Noxon comes
home, or there'll be a scandal."

"Depend on me!" said Jim.

Muffling their laughter like two runaways, they stole down the
steps. Her high-heeled slippers slipped and she toppled against him.
She caught him off his balance, and his arms went about her to save
her and himself. If he had been Irish, he would have said that he
destroyed himself, for she was so unexpectedly warm and silken and
lithe that she became instantly something other than the Charity
he had adored as a sad, sweet deity.

He realized that she was terribly a woman.

They were no longer boy and girl out on a gay little lark. They were
a man unhappily married and a woman unhappily unmarried, setting
forth on a wild steed for a wild ride through the reluctant autumn
air. The neighboring sea gave out the stored-up warmth of summer,
and the moon with the tilted face of a haloed nun yearned over them.

When Jim helped Charity into the car her arm seemed to burn in his
palm. He hesitated a moment, and a thought fluttered through his
mind that he ought not to hazard the adventure. But another thought
chased it away, a thought of the idiocy of being afraid, and another
thought of how impossible it was to ask her to get out and go back.

He found the coat, a heavy, short coat, and held it for her, saw
her ensconced comfortably, stepped in and closed the door softly.
The car went forward as smoothly as a skiff on a swift, smooth
water.

Charity was not so solemn as Jim. She was excited and flattered by
such an unforeseen diversion breaking in on her doleful solitude.

"It's been so long since a man asked me to go buggy-riding,"
she said, "that I've forgotten how to behave. I'm getting to be
a regular old maid, Jim."

"Huh!" was all that Jim could think of.

It was capable of many interpretations--reproof, anger at fate,
polite disbelief, deprecation.

Jim tried to run away from his peculiar and most annoying emotions.
But Charity went with him. She looked back and said:

"Funny how the moon rides after us in her white limousine."

"Huh!" said Jim.

"Is that Mexican you're speaking?" she chided.

"I was just thinking," Jim growled.

"What?"

"Oh, nothing much--except what a ghastly shame it is that
so--so--well, I don't know what to call you--but well, a woman like
you--that you should be living alone with nothing better to do than
run the gantlet of those God-awful submarines and probably get blown
up and drowned, or, worse yet, spend your days breaking your heart
nursing a lot of poor mangled, groaning Frenchmen that get shot to
pieces or poisoned with gas or--Oh, it's rotten! That's all it is:
it's rotten!"

"Somebody has to take care of them."

"Oh, I know; but it oughtn't to be you. If there was any manhood
in this country, you'd have Americans to nurse."

"There are Americans over there, droves of them."

"Yes, but they're not wearing our uniform. We ought to be over
there under our own flag. I ought to be over there."

"Maybe you will be. I'll go on ahead and be waiting for you."

There is nothing more pitiful than sorrow that tries to smile,
and Jim groaned:

"Oh, Charity Coe! Charity Coe!"

He gripped the wheel to keep from putting his hand out to hers. And
they went in silence, thinking in the epic elegy of their time.

Jim drove his car up to the end of Rhode Island and across to
Tiverton; then he left the highway for the lonelier roads. The car
charged the dark hills and galloped the levels, a black stallion
with silent hoofs and dreadful haste. There was so much death, so
much death in the world! The youth and strength and genius of all
Europe were going over the brink eternally in a Niagara of blood.

And the sea that Charity was about to venture on, the sea whose
estuaries lapped this sidelong shore so innocently with such tender
luster under the gentle moon, was drawing down every day and every
night ships and ships and ships with their treasures of labor and
their brave crews till it seemed that the floor of the ocean must
be populous with the dead.

Charity felt quite close to death. A very solemn tenderness of
farewell endeared the beautiful world and all its doomed creatures.
But most dear of all was this big, simple man at her side, the man
she ought to have married. It was all her fault that she had not.
She owed him a profound eternal apology, and she had not the right
to pay the debt--that is, so long as she lived she had not the right.
But if they were never to meet again--then she was already dying
to him.

It was important that she should not depart this life without making
restitution of what she owed. She had owed Jim Dyckman the love he
had pleaded for from her and would not get from anyone else.

He had a right to love, and it was to be eternally denied to him.
He would go on bitterly grieved and shamed to think that nobody
could love him, for Charity had repulsed him, and some day he would
learn that Kedzie had deceived him.

Lacking the courage to warn him against his wife, Charity felt
that she must have at least the courage to say;

"Good-by, Jim. I have been loving you of late with a great love."

There would be no injury done to Kedzie thus, for Charity would
speak as a ghost, an impalpable departed one. There would be no
sin--only a beautiful expiation by confession. She was enfranchised
of earthly restraints, enfranchised as the dead are from mortal
obligations.

But the moods that are so holy, so pure, and so vast while they are
moods resent words. Words are like tin cups to carry the ocean in.
It is no longer an ocean when a bit of it is scooped up. It is only
a little brackish water, odious to drink and quenching no thirst.

Charity could not devise the first phrase of her huge and oceanic
emotion. It would have been only a proffer of brine that Jim could
not have relished from her. He understood better her silence. They
went blindly on and on, letting the road lead them and the first
whim decide which turn to take and which to pass.

And so they were eventually lost in the land as they were lost
in their mood.

And after a time of wonderful enthusiasms in their common grief
the realities began to claim them back. A loud report like a
pistol-shot announced that the poetry of motion had become prose.

Jim stopped the car and became a blacksmith while he went through
the tool-box, found a jack for the wheel, laboriously unshipped
the demountable rim, replaced it with the extra wheel, and set
forth again.

The job had not improved the cleanliness of his hands nor spared
the chastity of his shirt-bosom. But the car had four wheels to
go on, and they regained a main road at last and found a signboard
announcing, "Tiverton, 18 miles." That meant thirty miles to Newport.

Charity looked at her watch. It brought her back from the
timelessness of her meditation to the world where the dock had
a great deal to say about what was respectable and what not.

"Good Lord!" she groaned. "Mrs. Noxon is home long ago and scared
or shocked to death. We must fly!"

They flew, angry, both of them, at having to hurry back to school
and a withering reprimand, as if they were still mere brats.
Gradually the car began to refuse the call for haste. Its speed
sickened, gasped, died.

Jim swore quite informally, and raged: "I told that infernal hound
to fill the tank. He forgot! The gas is gone."

Charity shrugged her shoulders. "I deserved it," she said. "I only
hope I don't get you into trouble. What will your wife say?"

"What won't she say? But I'm thinking about you."

"It doesn't matter about me. I've got nobody who cares enough
to scold me."

They were suddenly illumined by the headlights of an approaching
car. They shielded their faces from the glare instinctively. They
felt honest, but they did not look honest out here together.

The car was checked and a voice called from the blur, "Want any
help?"

"No, thanks," Jim answered from his shadow.

The car rolled on. While Jim made a vain post-mortem examination of
the car's machinery Charity looked about for a guide-post. She found
a large signboard proclaiming "Viewcrest Inn, 1 mile." She told Jim.

He said: "I know of it. It has a bad name, but so long as the
gasolene is good--I'll go get some. Make yourself at home."
He paused. "I can't leave you alone here in the wilderness at
midnight."

"I'll go along."

"In those high-heeled shoes?"

"And these low-necked gown," sighed Charity. "Oh, what a fool,
what a stupid fool I've been!"

But she set forth. Jim offered his arm. She declined it at first,
but she was glad enough of it later. They made an odd-looking
couple, both in evening dress, promenading a country road. All the
wealth of both of them was insufficient to purchase them so much as
a street-car ride. They were paupers--the slaves, not the captains,
of their fate. Charity stumbled and tottered, her ankles wrenched by
the ruts, her stilted slippers going to ruin. Jim offered to carry
her. She refused indignantly. She would have accepted a lift from
any other vehicle now, but none appeared. The only lights were in
the sky, where a storm was practising with fireworks.

"Just our luck to get drenched," said Jim.

It was about the only bad luck they escaped, but the threat of it
lent Charity speed. They passed one farm, whose dogs rushed out
and bayed at them carnivorously.

"That's the way people will bark when they find out about our
innocent little picnic," said Charity.

"They're not going to find out," said Jim.

"Trying to keep it secret gives it a guilty look," said Charity.

"What people don't know won't hurt 'em," said Jim.

"What they do imagine will hurt us," said Charity.

At the top of a knoll in a clandestine group of trees they found
"Viewcrest Inn." It was dark but for a dim light in the office.
The door of that was locked.

Trade was dull, now that the Newport season was over, and only
an occasional couple from Fall River, Providence, or New Bedford
tested the diminished hospitality. But to-night there had been a
concurrence of visitors. Jim rattled at the door. A waiter appeared,
yawning candidly. He limped to the door with a gait that Kedzie
would have recognized.

He peered out and shook his head, waving the intruders away. Jim
shook the knob and glowered back.

The waiter, who, in the classic phrase, was "none other than" Skip
Magruder, unlocked the door.

"Nothin' doin', folks," said Skip. "Standin' room only. Not a room
left."

"I don't want any of your dirty rooms," said Jim. "I want some
gasolene."

"Bar's closed," said Skip, who had a nimble wit.

"I said gasolene!" said Jim, menacingly.

"Sorry, boss, but the last car out took the last drop we had in
the pump. We'll have some more to-morrow mornin'."

"My God!" Jim whispered.

Then the storm broke. A thunder smash like the bolt of an indignant
Heaven. It turned on all the faucets above.

"Where's the telephone?" Jim demanded.

"T.D.," said Skip.

"What's that?"

"Temporary discontinued." Skip grew confidential. "The boss was
a little slow on the pay and they shut him off. We're takin' in
a lot of dough to-night, though, and he'll prob'ly get it goin'
to-morrow all right."

To-morrow again! Jim snarled back at the pack of wolfish
circumstances closing in on him. He turned to Charity.

"We've got to stay here."

Charity "went white," as the saying is. The rain streamed down.

"We 'ain't a room left," said Skip.

"You've got to have," said Jim.

"Have to speak to the artshiteck," said Skip. Then he rubbed his
head, trying to get out an idea by massage. "There's the poller.
Big lounge there, but not made up. Would you and your wife wish
the poller?"

He dragged the "wife" with a tone that nearly got him throttled. But
Jim paused. A complicated thought held him. To protest that Charity
was not his wife seemed hardly the most reassuring thing to do.
He let the word go and ignored Skip's cynical intonation. Jim's
knuckles ached to rebuke him, but he had not fought a waiter since
his wild young days. And Skip was protected by his infirmity.

Charity was frightened and revolted, abject with remorse for such
a disgusting consequence of such a sweet, harmless impulse. She was
afraid of Jim's temper. She said:

"Take the parlor by all means."

"All right," said Jim.

Skip fumbled about the desk for a big book, and, finding it, opened
it and handed Jim a pen.

"Register, please," said Skip.

"I will not."

"Rules of the house."

"What do I care about your rules!"

"Have to wake the boss, then."

"Give me the pen."

He started to write his own name; that left Charity's designation
in doubt. He glanced at the other names. "Mr. and Mrs. George
Washington" were there, "Mr. and Mrs. John Smith" twice, as well
as "William Jones and wife."

Jim wondered if the waiter knew him. So many waiters did. At length,
with a flash of angry impulse, he wrote: "James D--," paused,
finished "Dysart," hesitated again, then put "Mr. and Mrs." before
it. Skip read, and grinned. He did not know who Jim was, but he
knew he was no Dysart.

Skip led the way to the parlor up-stairs, lighted the lights,
and hastily disappeared, fearing that he might be asked to fetch
something to eat or drink. He was so tired and sleepy that even the
prospect of a tip did not interest him so much as the prospect of
his cot in the attic, where he could dream that he was in New York
again.

Jim and Charity looked at each other. Jim munched his own curses,
and Charity laughed and cried together. Jim's arms had an instinct
for taking her to his heart, but he felt that he must be more
respectful than ever since they were in so respectless a plight.
She never seemed purer and sadder to him than then.

She noted how haggard and dismal he looked, and said, "Aren't you
going to sit down?"

"No--not here," he said. "You curl up on that plush horror and get
some rest."

"I will not!" said Charity.

"You will, too," said Jim. "You're a wreck, and I ought to be shot.
Get some sleep, for God's sake!"

"What becomes of you?"

"I'll scout round and find a place in the office. I think there is
a billiard-room. If worst comes to worst, I'll do what Mrs. Leslie
Carter did in a play I saw--sleep on the dining-room table."

"Not less than a table d'hote will hold you," Charity smiled, wanly.

"Don't worry about me. You go by-by and pray the Lord to forgive me
and help us both."

He waved his hand to her in a heartbreak of bemocked and benighted
tenderness and closed the door. He prowled softly about the office
and the adjacent rooms, but found no place to sleep. He was in such
a fever of wrath at himself that he walked out in the rain to cool
his head. Then he sank into a chair, read an old Boston paper twice,
and fell asleep among the advertisements.

He woke at daybreak. The rain had ended and he wandered out in
the chill, wet grounds of the shabby inn. The morning light was
merciless on the buildings, the leafless trees, and on his own
costume. The promised view from the crest was swathed in haze--so
was his outlook on the future.

His fury at the situation grew as he pondered it. He was like a
tiger in a pit. He raged as much at himself as at the people who
would take advantage of him. The ludicrousness of the situation
added the ultimate torment. He could not save Charity except by
ingenious deceptions which would be a proof of guilt if they did
not succeed miraculously.

The dress he was in and the dress she was in were the very
habiliments of guilt. Getting back to Newport in evening clothes
would be the advertisement of their escapade. His expansive
shirt-bosom might as well have been a sandwich-board. His broadcloth
trousers and his patent-leather pumps would be worse than rags.

And Charity had no hat. There was an unmistakable dressed-up
eveningness about them both.

This struck him as the first evil to remedy. As with an escaped
convict, his prime necessity was a change of clothes. There was
only one way to manage that. He went back to the hotel and found
a startled early-morning waiter sweeping out the office. Jim asked
where the nearest telephone was, and learned that it was half a
mile away at a farm-house.

Jim turned up his collar, pulled down his motor-cap, and struck
out along the muddy road. He startled the farmer's family and their
large hands were not wide enough to hide their wider smiles.

On the long hike thither Jim had worked out his stratagem. He called
up his house, or, rather, Kedzie's house, in Newport, and after much
delay got his yawning valet to the telephone. He never had liked
that valet less than now.

"That you, Dallam? My car broke down out in the country," he
explained, every syllable a sugarless quinine pill in his throat.
"That is to say, the gasolene gave out. I am in my evening clothes,
so is--er--Mrs.--er--the lady I was with. I want you to bring me
at once an outfit of day clothes, and a--one of my wife's long
motor-coats--a very long one--and one of her small hats. Then get
out my wife's limousine and send the suit-case and the coat and hat
to me here at the Viewcrest Inn, and tell the chauffeur to bring
an extra can of gasolene."

A voice with an intolerable smile in it came back: "Very good, sir.
I presume I'd better not waken Mrs. Dyckman?"

"Naturally not. I don't want to--er--alarm her."

"She was quite alarmed when you didn't come home, sir, last night."

"Well, I'll explain when I see her. Do you understand the
situation?"

"Perfectly, sir."

Jim writhed at that. But he had done his best and he would take
the worst.

The farmer gave him a ride to the hotel in his milk-wagon. When Jim
rode up in a parody of state he saw Charity peeping from the parlor
window. The morning light had made the situation plain to her. It
did not improve on inspection. It took very little imagination to
predict a disastrous event, though Jim explained the felicity of
his scheme. He had planned to have Charity ride in in the limousine
alone, while he took his own car back with the gasolene that was on
the way.

The twain were compelled by their costume to stay in the parlor
together. They were ferociously hungry and ordered breakfast at
last. It took forever to get it, for guests of that hotel were not
ordinarily early risers.

Skip Magruder, dragged from his slumbers to serve the meal, found
Charity and Jim in the room where he had left them. He made such
vigorous efforts to overlook their appearance in bedraggled dinner
clothes at a country breakfast that Jim threatened to break his head.
Skip grew surly and was ordered out.

After breakfast Jim and Charity waited and waited, keeping to the
parlor lest the other guests see them.

At last the limousine arrived. As soon as he heard it coming Jim
hurried to the window to make sure that it was his--or, rather,
his wife's.

It was--so much his wife's that she stepped out of it. Also her
mother. Also her father. They advanced on the hotel.

Jim and Charity were stupefied. There was a look on Kedzie's face
that frightened him.

"She means business," he groaned.

Charity sighed: "Divorce! And me to be named!"

"She won't do that. She owes you everything."

"What an ideal chance to pay off the debt!"

"Don't you worry. I'll protect you," Jim insisted.

"How?" said Charity.

"I'll fight the case to the limit."

"Are you so eager to keep your wife?" said Charity.

"No. I never did love her. I'll never forgive her for this."

But he had not the courage to go and meet Kedzie and her mother
and her father. They were an unconscionable time coming.

He did not know that Kedzie and Skip Magruder were renewing old
acquaintance.

While he waited the full horror of his dilemma came over him. Kedzie
would undoubtedly sue him for divorce. If he lost, Charity would be
publicly disgraced. If he won, he would be tied to Kedzie for life.




CHAPTER VII

A quick temper is an excellent friend for bolstering up an ailing
conscience, especially if itself is bolstered by an inability to see
the point of view of the other party to a conflict.

Kedzie's wrath at Charity justified to Kedzie any cruelty, especially
as Kedzie was all harrowed up by the fear of losing the Marquess of
Strathdene. And Kedzie loved Strathdene as much as she could ever
love anybody.

For one thing Strathdene was fiercely jealous of her--and the poor
child had been simply famished for a little jealousy. Her first
husband had hardly known what the word meant. Before their marriage
Gilfoyle had permitted her to dance the Greek dances without paying
her the compliment of a beating. After their marriage he had gone
to Chicago to earn a living and left her alone in New York City
where there were millions of rivals.

Her second husband had been very philosophical about her career and
had taken the news of her previous marriage with disgusting stoicism.
Finally he had gone to the Mexican Border for an indefinite stay,
leaving her to her own devices and the devices of any man who came
along. It was too much like leaving a diamond outdoors: it cheapened
the diamond.

But Strathdene--ah, Strathdene! He turned blue at the mention of
Kedzie's husband. When Jim came back from Texas and Kedzie had to be
polite to him Strathdene almost had hydrophobia. He accused Kedzie of
actually welcoming Jim. He charged her with polyandry. He threatened
to shoot her and her husband and himself. He comported himself unlike
any traditional Englishman of literature. He was, in fact, himself
and what he did was like him. He was a born aviator. His heart was
used to racing at unheard-of speeds. He could sustain superhuman
exaltations and depressions.

Being in love with him was like going up in an airship with him,
which was one of Kedzie's ambitions for the future. She dreamed of
a third honeymoon _in excelsis._

Strathdene told her that if she ever looked at another man after she
married him he would take her up ten thousand feet in the clouds, set
his airship on fire, and drop with her as one cinder into the ocean.
What handsomer tribute could any woman ask of a man? He was a lover
worth fighting for.

But she had felt uncertain of winning him till that wonderful morning
when Jim did not come back home. She woke up early all by herself and
heard the valet answer Jim's call from Viewcrest.

She had made a friend of Dallam by her flirtation with the nobility.
The poor fellow had suffered tortures from the degradation of his
master's alliance with a commoner like Kedzie until Kedzie developed
her alliance with the Marquess. Then his valetic soul expanded again.

He looked upon her as his salvation.

Over the telephone she heard him now promising Jim that he would
not tell Kedzie. If Jim's old valet, Jules, had not gone to France
and his death he would have saved Jim from infernal distresses, but
this substitute had a malignant interest in his master's confusion.
Dallam proceeded forthwith to rap at Mrs. Dyckman's door and spoke
through it, deferentially:

"Beg pardon, ma'am, but could I have a word?"

Kedzie wrapped herself in a bath-robe and opened the door a chink to
hear the rest of what she had heard in part. The valet had no collar
on and his overnight beard not off, and he, too, was in a bath-robe.
Man and mistress stood there like genius and madness, "and thin
partitions did their bounds divide."

"Very sorry to trouble you, ma'am," he said, "but I'm compelled to.
The master has just telephoned me that his car broke down at the
Viewcrest Inn out Tiverton way, and he wants his morning clothes,
and also--if you'll pardon me, ma'am--he instructed me to send him
a long motor-coat of yours and a large hat and your limousine. I was
directed not to--ahem--to trouble you about it, ma'am, but I 'ardly
dared."

He helped her out so perfectly that she had no need to say anything
more than, "Quite right."

She was glad that the door screened her from observation, for
she went through a crisis of emotions, wrath and disgust at Jim's
perfidy _versus_ ecstasy and gratitude to him for it.

She beat her breast with her hand as if to keep her trembling heart
from turning a somersault into her mouth. Then she spoke with a calm
that showed how far she had traveled in self-control.

"Very good. You were quite right. Call the chauffeur and tell him
to bring round my closed car. Then send me my maid and have the cook
get me some coffee. Then you may telephone my mother and father and
ask them to come over at once. Please send my car for them. You might
have coffee for them also. For we'll all be riding out to--did you
say Viewcrest Inn?"

"Yes, ma'am. Very good, ma'am. Thank you!"

He went away thinking to himself. He thought in cockney: "My Gawd!
w'at a milit'ry genius! She dictites a horder loike a Proosian
general. I'm beginnin' to fink she's gowing to do milord the mokkis
prahd. There's no daht abaht it. Stroike me, if there is."

By the time Kedzie was dressed and coffeed her panicky father
and mother were collected and fed, and she had selected her best
motor-coat for the shroud of whatever woman it was at Viewcrest.
She dared not dream it was Charity.

She had time enough to tell her parents all there was to tell on
the voyage, but she had no idea that her limousine was taking her
to the very inn that Strathdene had lured her to on that night when
he tested her worthiness of his respect.

It had been dark on that occasion and she had been in such a chaos
that she had paid no heed to the name of the place or the dark roads
leading thither.

She almost swooned when she reached the Viewcrest Inn and found
herself confronted by Skip Magruder. And so did Skip. He had not
recognized the back of her head before, but her face smote him now.
There was no escaping him. Her beauty was enriched by her costume
and her mien was ripened by experience, but she was unforgetably
herself. He was still a waiter, and the apron he had on and the
napkin he clutched might have been the same one he had when she
first saw him.

When he saw her now again he gasped the name he had known her by:
"Anitar! Anitar Adair! Well, I'll be--"

Then his face darkened with the memory of disprized love. He
recalled the cruel answer, "Nothing doing," that she had indorsed
on the stage-door letter he sent her long ago.

But the military genius that had guided Kedzie this morning inspired
her still. She was not going to lose her victory for any flank attack
from an ally in ambush. She sent out a flag of truce.

"Why, Skip!" she cried. "Dear old Skip! I want you to meet my father
and mother. Mr. Magruder was terribly kind to me when I was alone
and friendless in New York."

Mrs. Thropp had outgrown waiters and even Adna regretted the
reversion to Nimrim that led him to shake hands and say, "Please
to meecher."

The stupefied proprietor of the inn was begging for explanations of
this unheard-of colloquy, but Skip flicked him away with his napkin
as if he were a bluebottle fly and motioned Kedzie to a corner of
the office. Kedzie explained, breathlessly:

"Skip, I'm in terrible trouble, and I'm so glad to find you here,
for you never failed me. I was very rude to you when you sent me
that note, but I--I was engaged to be married at the time and I
didn't think it proper to see anybody. And--well, I'm getting my
punishment now, for my husband is here with a strange woman--and--oh,
it's terrible, Skip! My heart is broken, but you've got to help me.
I know I can rely on you, can't I, dear old Skip?"

The girl was so efficient that she almost deserved her success. It
cost her something, though, to beguile a waiter with intimate appeals
that she might earn a title. But then in time of war no ally is to be
scorned and the lowliest recruit is worth enlisting. A Christian can
piously engage a Turk to help him whip another Christian.

When Kedzie pulled out the tremolo stop and looked up, big-eyed,
and pouted at him, Skip was hers.

"Your husband, Anitar? Your husband here? Why, the low-life hound!
I'll go up and kill him for you if you want me to."

Kedzie explained that she didn't want to get her dear Skip into
any trouble, but she did want his help. Skip found her a good
boarding-place the first time he met her, and now she had to dupe
him into securing her furnished rooms and board in a castle. She may
have rather encouraged him to imagine that once she was free from
Jim she would listen once more to Skip. But there is no evidence on
that point and he must have felt a certain awe of her. His pretty
duckling had become so gorgeous a swan.

Her parley with Skip had delayed her march up-stairs to the attack,
but Jim and Charity could only wait in befuddled suspense, unwilling
and afraid to attempt a flight.

Kedzie went up-stairs at last, backed by her father and mother and
Skip and the chauffeur with the suit-case of Jim's clothes. Kedzie
was dazed at the sight of Charity.

But there was no need of any oration.

After a little sniffing and nodding of the head she spoke:

"Well, I thought as much! Jim, you telephoned for some things
of mine and of yours. Here they are. There's a can of gasolene
down-stairs for you. Here's your suit-case, and the coat and hat
for Mrs. Cheever. I presume you will go back in your own car."

Jim nodded.

"Then we needn't keep you any longer. Mr. McNiven is your lawyer
still, I suppose. I'll send my lawyer to him. Come along,
mother--and father."

She led her little cohort down-stairs and bade Skip a very cordial
_au revoir._




CHAPTER VIII

The Dyckman divorce farce might have been as politely performed
as _l'affaire Cheever_--or even more so than that, since
practice makes perfect. At least a temporary secrecy could have
been secured with leisureliness by a residence in another State.

But Kedzie felt as Zada did, that she simply could not wait, though
her reason was well to the opposite. Zada had been afraid that a
child would arrive before the divorce, but Kedzie that a gentleman
would depart.

Strathdene was straining at the anchor like one of his own biplanes
with the wind nudging its wings. In Europe they were shooting down
airships by the score nearly every day and Strathdene wanted to go
back. "It's not fair to the Huns," he said. "They haven't had a
pot-shot at me for so long they'll forget I was ever over. And some
of those men that were corporals when I made my Ace, are Aces now
as well and they're crawling up on my score! I'll have to fly all
the time to catch up."

But he wanted to take with him his beauty. He was jealous of Uncle
Sam and afraid to trust Kedzie to him. The more inconvenient she
became to him the more determined he grew to overcome the obstacles
to her possession.

He abominated the necessity of taking his bride through the side
door of the court-house to the altar, but he would not give her up.
It looked, however, as if he would have to. And then he received
mysteriously an assignment to the inspection of flying-machines
purchased in the American market. Kedzie told him that it was a
Heaven-sent answer to her prayers, and he believed it.

But it was his poor mother's work; she had written to a friend in
the British Embassy imploring him to keep her precious boy out of
France as long as possible. Hecatombs of gallant young lords were
being butchered and she had lost a son, two brothers, a nephew,
and unnumbered friends. The whole nobility of Europe was as deep
in mourning as all the other grades of prestige. She wanted a brief
respite from terror. She did not know till later to what further
risks she was exposing her boy.

Kedzie was grimly resolute about getting her freedom from Jim in
order to transfer it to Strathdene. She planned to manage it quietly
for the sake of her own future. But a sickening mess was made of it.
For Kedzie fell into the hands of a too, too conscientious lawyer.
It is impossible to be loyal in all directions, and young Mr. Anson
Beattie was loyal first to his wife and children, whom he loved
devotedly. They needed money and clients came slowly to him.

His wife had relatives in Newport and they chanced to be visiting
there. The relatives were shopkeepers, to whom Pet Bettany owed
much money. That was how Kedzie came to consult Mr. Beattie. Kedzie
telephoned Pet the moment she got back from the Viewcrest Inn,
and Pet told her of Beattie.

When Kedzie drifted into his ken with a word of introduction from
Pet Bettany he hailed her as a Heaven-sent messenger. She brought
him advertisement, and big fees on a platter.

The very name of Dyckman was incense and myrrh. Mr. Beattie smelled
gold. When Kedzie poured out her story and explained that the famous
Mrs. Charity Cheever was the wreckress of her home Mr. Beattie saw
head-lines everywhere.

If the Dyckmans had been a humble couple he would have tried to
reconcile them, perhaps, or he would have separated them with little
noise. But it was noise he wanted. The longer and louder the trial
the more free space Mr. Beattie would get.

"It Pays to Advertise" is a necessary motto for all professions.
The lawyer is advertised by his hating enemies, Beattie said to
himself, and to his ecstatic wife when he went to her room after
Kedzie left. His wife would never have taken a divorce if divorces
were distributed at every door like handbills. Mr. Beattie said to
Mrs. Beattie:

"Soul o' my soul, I'm going to handle this case in such a way that
it will stir up a smell from here to California. I'll get that little
woman an alimony that will break all known records and I'll take
a percentage of the gate receipts as they come in. I wouldn't trust
my little client a foot away."

"Don't trust her too close, either," said his devoted spouse, who
was just jealous enough to be remembered in time of stress.

Beattie was the sort of lawyer one reads about oftener than one
meets, and he wanted to be read about. He had the almost necessary
lawyer gift of beginning to hate the opposition as soon as he
learned what it was. If Jim had engaged him he would have hated
Kedzie with religious ardor. Kedzie engaged him; so he abominated
Jim and everybody and everything associated with him from his name
to his scarf-pin.

He warned Kedzie not to spend an hour under Jim Dyckman's roof, lest
she seem to condone what she discovered. He advised her to disappear
till Beattie was ready to strike.

That was the reason why there was no compromise, no concession, no
politeness in the divorce. If collusion is vicious this case was
certainly pure of it.

Jim was not permitted a quiet talk with Kedzie from the moment she
found him at the Viewcrest Inn. Her arrival there plus her family had
thrown him into a stupor. It was a situation for a genius to handle,
since the honester a man is the more he is confused at being found
in a situation that looks dishonest. Jim was never less a genius than
then. Even Charity, who usually found a word when a word was needed,
said not one. What could she say? Kedzie ignored her, accused her of
nothing, and did not linger.

When Jim and Charity, left alone together again, looked at each
other they were too disgusted to regret that they had not been as
guilty as they looked. Life had the jaundice in their eyes.

But they had to get back to the world by way of material things.
Jim had to change his evening clothes. He asked Charity to wait in
the office below. He pointed to the motor-coat and hat that Kedzie
had brought and tossed on a lounge.

Charity recoiled from wearing Kedzie's cast-off clothes or from
disguising as Jim's wife, but her downcast eyes revealed her bare
shoulders and arms and her delicate evening gown. They had been
exquisitely appropriate to night and night lights, but they were
ghastly in the day.

She put on Kedzie's mantle; it blistered her like the mantle Medea
sent to her successor in her husband's love. She sat in the office
and some of the guests passed through. She could see that they took
her to be one of their sort, and shocks of red and white alternated
through her skin.

When Jim was ready he came down with his evening clothes in the
suit-case. The baggage was the final convincing touch. He picked
up the gasolene-can and toted it that weary mile. One of the hotel
servants offered to carry it, but Jim was in no mood for company.
There are things that the wealthiest man does not want to have done
for him.

They found the car studded with pools of water from the rain, and
Charity shook out the cushions while Jim filled up the tank.

"Quite domestic," said Charity, in the last dregs of bitterness.

Jim did not answer. He flung the can over into a field and hopped
into the car. He regretted that he had no spurs to dig into its
sides, no curb bit to jerk. He owed his destruction to that car.
For want of gasolene, the car was lost; for want of the car, a
reputation was lost.

He thought with frenzy as he drove. He had little imagination, but
it did not require an expert dreamer to foresee dire possibilities
ahead. He was so sorry for Charity that he could have wept. He
wanted to enfold her in his arms and promise her security. He wanted
to stand in front of her and take in his own breast all the arrows
of scorn that might shower upon her.

But the nearest approach to protection in his power lay along the
lines of appearing to be indifferent to her. He had not been told of
Kedzie's infatuation for Strathdene and he had not suspected it.

Charity was tempted to refer to it, but she felt that it would be
contemptibly petty at the moment. So Jim was permitted to hope that
he could find Kedzie, throw himself on her mercy and implore her to
believe in his innocence. It was a sickly hope, and his heart filled
with gall and with hatred of Kedzie and all she had brought on him.

He reached Newport with a terrific speed, and left Charity at Mrs.
Noxon's to make her own explanations. Mrs. Noxon had defended Charity
against gossip once before, but to defend her against appearances was
too much to ask.

"Well-behaved people," she told Charity, "do not have appearances."

She was so cold that Charity froze also, and set her maid to packing.
Mrs. Noxon's frigidity was a terrifying example of what she was to
expect. She returned to New York on the first train. Jim was on it,
too.

He had sped home, expecting to find Kedzie. She was gone and none
of the servants knew where. If he had found her in the ferocious
humor he had arrived at he might have given her the sort of divorce
popular in divorce-less countries, where they annul the wife instead
of the marriage. He might have sent Kedzie to the realm where there
is neither marrying nor giving in marriage--which should save a heap
of trouble.

Jim fancied that Kedzie must have taken the train to New York, since
she spoke of sending her lawyer to McNiven. It did not occur to him
that she could find a New York lawyer in Newport.

He met Charity, and not Kedzie, on the train. That made bad look
worse. But it gave Jim and Charity an opportunity to face the
calamity that was impending. Jim tried to reassure Charity that he
would keep her from suffering any public harm. The mere thought of
her liability to notoriety, the realization that her long life of
decency and devotion were at the mercy of the whim of a woman like
Kedzie, drove her frantic.

She begged Jim to leave her to her thoughts and he went away to the
purgatory of his own. Reaching New York, he returned to Charity to
offer his escort to her home. She broke out, petulantly:

"Don't take me any more places, Jim. I beg you!"

"Forgive me," he mumbled, and relieved her of his compromising
chivalry.

They went to their homes in separate taxicabs. Jim made haste to
his apartment. Kedzie was not there and had not been heard from.

Late as it was, he set out on a telephone chase for McNiven and
dragged him to a conference. It was midnight and Jim was haggard
with excitement.

There are two people at least to whom a wise man tells the truth--his
doctor and his lawyer. Neither of them has many illusions left, but
both usually know fact when they get a chance to face it.

Jim had nothing to conceal from McNiven and his innocence transpired
through all his bewilderment. He told just what had happened in its
farcical-funeral details. McNiven did not smile. Jim finished with
all his energy:

"Sandy, you know that Charity is the whitest woman on earth, a saint
if ever there was a saint. She's the one that's got to be protected.
Not a breath of her name must come out. If it takes the last cent
I've got and dad's got I want you to buy off that wife of mine. You
warned me against marrying her, and I wish to God I'd listened to
you. I'm not blaming her for being suspicious, but I can't let her
smash Charity. I'll protect Charity if I have to build a wall of
solid gold around her."

McNiven tried to quiet him. He saw no reason for alarm. "You don't
have to urge me to protect Charity," he said. "She's an angel as well
as my client. All you need is a little sleep. Go to bed and don't
worry. Remember, there never was a storm so big that it didn't blow
over."

"Yes, but what does it blow over before it blows over?" said Jim.

"You're talking in your sleep already. Good night," said McNiven.




CHAPTER IX

The next morning McNiven found Charity at his office when he
arrived. She had evidently been awake all night.

She told McNiven a story that agreed in the essentials with Jim's
except that she made herself out the fool where he had blamed
himself. McNiven had no success in trying to quiet her with soothing
promises of a tame conclusion. She dreaded Kedzie.

"If it were just an outburst of jealousy," she said, "you might talk
to the woman. But she's not jealous of her husband. She was as cool
as a cucumber when she found us together. She was glad of it, because
she had got a way to get her Marquess now. She's ambitious and Lady
Macbeth couldn't outdo her."

She told McNiven what she had not had the heart to tell Jim about
Strathdene. It worried him more than he admitted. While he meditated
on a measure to meet this sort of attack, Charity suggested one.
It was drastic, but she was desperate. She proposed the threat of
a countercharge against Kedzie.

McNiven shook his head and made strange noises in his pipe. He
asked for evidence against Kedzie. Charity could only quote the
general opinion.

McNiven said: "No. You allege innocence on your part in spite of
appearances which you admit are almost conclusive. You can hardly
claim that more innocent appearances on her part prove that she is
guilty. Besides, we don't want to stir up any more sediment. We'll
do everything on the Q. T. Money talks, and the little lady is not
deaf. My legal advice to you is, 'Don't fret,' and my medical advice
is, 'Go to bed and stay there till I send you word that it's all
over.' Remember one thing, there never was a storm so big that it
didn't blow over."

Charity was not in the least quieted. His sedative only annoyed
her ragged nerves.

"Keep my name clean," she whispered.

As she rode home in a taxicab that was like a refrigerator she
passed in the Fifth Avenue melee Zada L'Etoile, now Mrs. Cheever,
with the tiny little Cheever like a princelet asleep at her breast,
hiding with its pink head the letter "A" that had grown there.

People of cautious respectability spoke to Zada now with amiable
respect, and murmured:

"Funny thing! She's made a man of that good-for-nothing Peter
Cheever. They're as happy and as thick as thieves."

Charity had heard this saying, and she dreaded to realize that
perhaps in a few days respectable people would be turning from
herself, not seeing her, or storing up credit by snubbing her
and muttering:

"No wonder poor Cheever couldn't get along with her. He took the
blame like a gentleman, and now she's found out. She was a sly one,
but you can't fool all the people all the time."

Charity had not been gone from McNiven's office long before a
lawyer's clerk arrived bearing the papers for a divorce on statutory
grounds in the case of Dyckman versus Dyckman, Mrs. Charity C.
Cheever, co-respondent, Anson Beattie counsel for plaintiff.

McNiven went after Beattie at once and proposed a quiet treaty and
a settlement out of court. Beattie grinned so odiously that McNiven
had to say:

"Oh, I remember you. You used to be an ambulance-chaser. What are
you after now--a little dirty advertising?" "What are you after?"
said Beattie. "A little collusive juggling with the Seventh
Commandment?"

"The one against false witness is the Ninth," said McNiven, "But
let's have a conference. This war in Europe might have been avoided
by a little heart-to-heart talk beforehand. Let's profit by the
lesson."

Beattie consented to this, and promised to arrange it on condition
that in the mean while McNiven would accept service for his client.
This was done, and Beattie left.

He saw his great publicity campaign being thwarted, and changed
his mind. He hankered for fame more than gold. He filed the papers
and meditated. He did not know how much or how little Kedzie loved
her husband, and she had told him nothing of Strathdene. He feared
that a compromise might be patched up and perhaps a reconciliation
effected. He had had women come to him imploring a divorce from
their abominable husbands only to see the couple link up again,
kiss and make up, and call him an abominable villain for trying
to part them.

After some earnest consideration of the right of his own career
and his family to the full profit of this windfall, he looked up
a reporter and through him a group of reporters and promised them
a peep at something interesting.

He had the privilege of calling for the papers from the clerk of
the court, so he took them out and permitted the reporters to
glance within and make note of the contents.

Late editions of the evening papers gave the Dyckman divorce
a fanfare rivaling the evidence that the Germans were about to
resume their unrestricted submarine _Schrecklichkeit_.

If the spoken word is impossible to recall, how much more
irretrievable the word that is printed in millions of newspapers.
The name of Dyckman was a household word. It resounded now in every
household throughout the country, and across the sea, where the
name had become familiar in all the nations from the big financial
dealings of the elder Dyckman as a banker for the Allies.

Reporters played about Jim Dyckman that night as if they were
_banderilleros_ and he a raging bull. He fought them with
the same success.

They tried to find Charity, but she was in the doctor's care--
actually. The doctor himself dismissed the reporters. He called them
"ghouls," which did not sweeten their hearts toward his patient.

The next day there was probably not a morning paper in the United
States in any language that failed to star the news that Mrs. Dyckman
had found her husband's relations with Mrs. Cheever intolerable.

That morning saw the conference in McNiven's office, as promised by
Beattie. But Kedzie did not appear; she had vanished to some place
where she could not be found by anybody except the man who wrote
her highly imaginative affidavits for her and the notary public
who attested her signature.

At the conference with Jim, Kedzie was represented by counsel, also
by father. Jim called the lawyer Beattie some hard old Anglo-Saxon
names, and told him that if he were a little bigger he would give
him the beating that was coming to him. Then he turned to Kedzie's
father.

"Mr. Thropp," he pleaded, "you and I have always got along all right.
You know I've tried to do the right thing by your daughter. I'm ready
to now. She's too decent a girl to have done this thing on her own.
This is the work of that rotten skunk of a lawyer--I apologize to the
other skunks and the real lawyers. She has done a frightful injustice
to the best woman on earth. She can never undo it, but surely she
doesn't want to do any more. She's through with me, I suppose, but
we ought to be able to clean up this affair respectably and quietly
and not in the front show-window of all the damned newspapers in the
world.

"Can't you and I make a little quiet gentleman's agreement to
withdraw the charge and let the divorce go through decently? I'll
make any settlement on your daughter that she wants."

Adna pondered aloud, his claim-agent instincts alert: "Settlement,
eh? What might you call settlement?"

"Whatever you'd consider fair. How much would you say was right?"

Adna filled his lungs and mouthed the deliciously liquid word as if
it were a veritable _aurum potabile_:

"Millions!"

"What!" Jim gasped.

Adna fairly gargled it again:

"Millillions!"

The greed in the old man's eyes shot Dyckman's eyes with blood.
He snarled:

"So it's the plain old blackmail, eh? Well, you can go plumb
to hell!"

"All right," said Adna, felicitously, "but we won't go alone. I
and daughter will have comp'ny. Come on, Mr. Beattie."

After they had gone Jim realized that his hatred of being gouged had
involved Charity's priceless reputation. He told McNiven to recall
Beattie, but Charity herself appeared in a new and militant humor.

The first realization that her good name was gone had crushed her.
She had built it up like a mansion, adding a white stone day by
day. When it fell about her in ruins her soul had swooned with the
disaster.

After a night and a day of groveling terror she had recaptured the
valor that makes and keeps a woman good, and she leaped from her
sick bed and her sick soul into an armor of rage.

She burst in on McNiven and Jim and demanded a share in the battle.
When Jim told her of his latest blunder she spoke up, stoutly:

"You did the right thing. To try to buy them off would be to
confess guilt. The damage is done. The whole world has read the
lie. Now we'll make it read the truth. There must be some way for
me to defend my name, and I want to know what it is."

McNiven told her that the law allowed her to enter the case and
seek vindication, but he advised her against it. She thanked him
for the information and rejected the advice. She was gray with
battle-ardor and her very nostrils were fierce.

"I'm sorry to do anything to interfere with your welfare, Jim, for
if I win she wins you; but you can get rid of her some other way.
The little beast! She thinks she can make use of me as a bridge to
cross over to her Marquess, but she can't!"

"Her Marquess?" Jim mumbled. "What does that mean?"

Charity regretted her impetuous speech, but McNiven explained it.

Jim was pretty well deadened to shocks by this time, but the news
that his wife had been disloyal found an untouched spot in his
heart to stab. It gave him a needed resentment, however, and a
much-needed something to feel wronged about.

He caught a spark of Charity's blazing anger, and they resolved to
fight the case to the limit. And that was where it took them.




CHAPTER X

Once the battle was joined, a fierce desire for haste impelled all
of these people. Kedzie dreaded every hour's delay as a new risk
of losing Strathdene, who was showing an increasing rage at having
the name of his wife-to-be bandied about in the press, with her
portraits in formal pose or snapped by batteries of reporters.

Her lawyer emphasized the heartbreak it was to her to learn that
her adored husband had been led astray by her trusted friend. This
did not make pleasant reading for the jealous Strathdene, and he
wished himself jolly well out of the whole affair.

It was not long before his own name began to slip into the case by
innuendo. Once he was in, he could not decently abandon his Kedzie,
though he had to prove his devotion by denying it and threatening
to shoot anybody who implied that his interest in Mrs. Dyckman was
anything more than formal.

Jim Dyckman was impatient to have done with the suit, however it
ended. He was tossed on both horns of the dilemma. He was compelled
to fight one woman to save another. He could not defend Charity
without striking Kedzie and he could not spare Kedzie without
destroying Charity.

In a situation that would have overwhelmed the greatest tacticians
he floundered miserably. He vowed that whatever the outcome of
the case might be, he would never look at a woman again. Men find
it very easy to condemn womankind _en bloc_, and they are
forever forswearing the sex as if it were a unit or a bad habit.

During the necessary delay in reaching trial Jim asked and received
an extension of his leave of absence; then his regiment came home
from the Border and was mustered out of the Federal service and
received again into the State control. Jim felt almost as much
ashamed of involving his regiment in his scandal as Charity.

He had suffered so greatly from the embarrassment of the publicity
that he could hardly endure to face his regiment and drill with his
company. He offered his resignation again, but it was not accepted.

In fact, under the new condition of the National Guard service, his
immediate officers had nothing to do with his resignation.

The probability of a call to arms, not against Mexico, but against
the almost almighty German Empire, was so great that it looked like
slackery or cowardice to ask to be excused. His next dread was that
the regiment would be mustered in before the case was finished,
compelling its postponement and leaving Charity to languish
unrevenged.

For his inclusive anger at Everywoman soon changed back to deeper
affection than ever. The first sight of her on the witness-stand
at the mercy of the inquisition of the unscrupulous Beattie brought
back all his old emotions for her and unnumbered new.

He had seen a picture of one of the Christian martyrs whose torture
was inflicted on her by a man armed with steel pincers to pluck off
her flesh from her shuddering soul bit by bit. It seemed to him
that his sainted Charity was condemned to like atrocity. Her hands
were bound by the thongs of the law, her body was stripped to the
eyes of the crowd, and the tormentor went here and there, nipping
at the quick with intolerable cruelty.

And Jim must not go to her rescue. He must not protest or lift
a hand in her behalf. He must sit and suffer with her while the
anguish squeezed the big sweat out of his knotted brows.

It had been hard enough to await the appearance of the case on
the docket, to sit through the selection of the jury, and to
study the gradual recruitment of that squad of twelve sphinxes,
all commonplace, yet mysterious, lacking in all divinity of
comprehension and eager to be entertained with an exciting
conflict.

The fact that a woman was the plaintiff was a tremendous handicap
for Jim, even though a woman was allied with him in the defense.
The very name "co-respondent" condemned her in advance in the public
mind. And then she was rich and therefore dissipated in the minds
of those who cannot imagine wealth as providing other fascinating
businesses besides vice. And Jim was wealthy and therefore a proper
object for punishment. If he had earned his millions it must have
been by tyrannous corruption; if he had only inherited them that
was worse yet.

Beattie lost no chance to play on the baser phases of the noble and
essential suspicions of the democratic soul and also on Kedzie's
humble origin, her child-like prettiness proving absolutely a
child-like innocence and trust, and the homely simplicity of her
parents, who, being poor and ignorant, were therefore inevitably
virtuous and sincere.

Jim had realized from the first what a guilty aspect his unfortunate
excursion with Charity must wear in the eyes of any one but her and
him. Even the waiter who was on the ground had unwittingly conspired
with their delicacy to put them in a most indelicate situation. Skip
went on the stand, reveling in his first experience of fame, basking
in the spot-light like a cheap actor, and acting very badly, yet well
enough for the groundlings he amused.

Jim and Charity underwent a martyrdom of ridicule during his
testimony. A man and woman riding backward on a mule through a
jeering mob might seem pathetic enough if one had the heart to
deny himself the laughter, but Jim and Charity made their grotesque
pilgrimage without exciting sympathy.

Beattie had tried to get Mrs. Noxon on the stand to confirm the proof
that Charity had spent the night away, but the old lady showed her
contempt of the court and of the submarines by sailing for Europe
to escape the ordeal. The chauffeur, the valet, and the Viewcrest
servants were enough, however, to corroborate Skip Magruder's story
beyond any assailing, and handwriting experts had no difficulty in
convincing the jury that Jim's signature on the hotel register was
in his own handwriting. He had made no effort to disguise it or even
to change his name till the last of it was well begun.

Mr. and Mrs. Thropp made splendid witnesses for their child and
the old mother's tears melted a jury that had never seen her weep
for meaner reasons.

When Charity reached the stand the case against her was so complete
that all her bravery was gone. She felt herself a fool for having
brought the ordeal on herself. She took not even self-respect with
her to the chair of torture.




CHAPTER XI

In the good old days of Hester Prynne they published a faithless
wife by sewing a scarlet "A" upon the bosom of her dress. Nowadays
the word is pronounced "co-respondent," and it may be affixed to any
woman's name by any newspaper, or any plaintiff in a divorce case.

So fearful a power was so much abused that since 1911 in New York the
co-respondent has been permitted to come into the court and oppose
the label. It is in sort a revival of the ancient right to trial by
ordeal. This hideous privilege of proving innocence by walking unshod
over hot plowshares is most frigidly set forth in the statute where
the lawyer's gift for putting terrible things in desiccated phrases
was never better shown than in Section 1757.

In an action brought to obtain a divorce on the ground of adultery,
the plaintiff or defendant may serve a copy of his pleading on the
co-respondent named therein. At any time within twenty days after
such service on said co-respondent he may appear to defend such
action, so far as the issues affect such co-respondent. If no such
service be made, then at any time before the entry of judgment any
co-respondent named in any of the pleadings shall have the right,
at any time before the entry of judgment, to appear either in person
or by attorney in said action and demand of plaintiff's attorney a
copy of the summons and complaint, which must be served within ten
days thereafter, and he may appear to defend such action, so far
as the issues affect such co-respondent. In case no one of the
allegations of adultery controverted by such co-respondent shall
be proved, such co-respondent shall be entitled to a bill of costs
against the person naming him as such co-respondent, which bill of
costs shall consist only of the sum now allowed by law as a trial
fee, and disbursements, and such co-respondent shall be entitled
to have an execution issue for the collection of the same.

The exact amount of money was set forth in another place, in Section
3251, where it is stated that the sums obtainable are "for trial of
an issue of fact, $30, and when the trial necessarily occupies more
than two days, $10 in addition thereto."

In other words, Mrs. Charity Coe Cheever, finding her life of good
works and pure deeds crowned with the infamy which Mrs. Kedzie
Dyckman in her anger and her haste pressed on her brow, had the
full permission of the law to come into the public court, face
a vitriolic lawyer, and deny her guilt.

If she survived the trip through hell she could collect from her
accuser forty dollars to pay her lawyer with. The priceless boon of
such a vindication she could keep for herself. And that ended her.

This is only one of the numberless vicious and filthy and merciless
consequences of the things done in the name of virtue by those who
believe divorce to be so great an evil that they will commit every
other evil in order to oppose it.

In no other realm of law and punishment has severity had more need
of hypocrisy to justify itself than in the realm of wedlock. What
grosser burlesque could there be than the conflict between the theory
and the practice? The law and the Church, claiming what few people
will deny, that marriage is an immensely solemn, even a sacred,
condition, have made entrance into it as easy as possible and the
escape from it as difficult. It is as if one were to say, "Revolvers
are very dangerous weapons, therefore they shall be placed within
the reach of infants, but they must on no account be taken away from
them, and once grasped they must never be laid down."

The most stringent rules have been formulated to prevent those people
from marrying each other who are least likely to want to--namely,
blood relations. But there is no law against total strangers meeting
at the altar for the first time, and the marriage by proxy of people
who have never seen each other has had the frequent blessing of
ecclesiastic pomp.

At a time when legal divorce was too horrible to contemplate they
made very pretty festivals of betrothing little children who could
not understand the ceremony or even parrot the pledge. Who indeed
can understand the pledge before its meaning is made clear by life?

And why should people be forced to make an eternal pledge whose
keeping is beyond their power or prophecy and from which there is
no release? What is it but a subornation of perjury?

Those who so blithely scatter flowers before bridal couples and
old shoes after them are perfectly benevolent, of course, in their
abhorrence of separating the twain if they begin to throw their old
shoes at each other; for they are sincerely convinced that if people
were permitted to do as they pleased, nothing on earth would please
them but vice. And so those who have the lawmaking itch set about
saving humanity from itself by making inhuman laws, which the clever
and the criminal evade or break through, leaving the gentle and the
timid in the net.

For there was never no divorce. No amount of law has ever availed
to keep those together who had the courage or the cruelty to break
the bonds. By hook or by crook, if not by book, they will be free.

The question of the children is often used to cloud the issue, as if
all that children needed for their welfare were the formal alliance
of their parents, and as if a home where hatred rages or complacent
vice is serene were the ideal rearing-ground for the young. When love
of their children is enough to keep two incompatible souls together
there is no need of the law. When that love is insufficient what can
the law accomplish? And what of the innumerable families where there
have been no children, or where they are dead or grown-up?

The experiment of forbidding what cannot be prevented and of refusing
legal sanction to what human nature demands has been given centuries
of trial with no success.

Marriage is among the last of the institutions to have the daylight
let in and the windows thrown open. For the home is no more
threatened by liberty than the State is, and that pair which is
kept together only by the shackles of the law is already divorced;
its cohabitation is a scandal. Free love in the promiscuous sense is
no uglier than coupled loathing. The social life of that community
where divorce is least free is no purer than that where divorce is
not difficult. Otherwise South Carolina, which alone of the States
permits no divorce on any ground, should be an incomparable Eden of
marital innocence. Is it? And New York, which has only one ground,
and that the scriptural, should be the next most innocent. Is it?

Meanwhile the mismated of our day who are struggling through
the transition period between the despotism of matrimony and its
republic can be sure that the righteous will omit no abuse that
they can inflict. Those who would free Russias must face Siberias.

The worst phase of it is that some of those who are determined to
be free and cannot otherwise get free will not hesitate to destroy
innocent persons who may be useful to their escape.

Mrs. Kedzie Dyckman had her heart set on releasing herself from
the husband she had in order that she might try another who promised
her more happiness, more love, and more prestige. The husband she
had would have been willing enough to set her free, both because he
liked to give her whatever she wanted and because he was not in love
with their marriage himself.

But the law of New York State says that married couples shall not
uncouple amicably and intelligently. If they will part it must be
with bitterness and laceration. One of the two must be driven out
through the ugly gate of adultery. They must part as enemies and they
must sacrifice some third person as a blood-offering on the altar.

It is a strange thing that the lamb, which is the symbol of innocence
and harmlessness, should have always been the favorite for sacrifice.

Charity Coe had happened along at the convenient moment.




CHAPTER XII

"Mrs. Charity Coe Cheever, take the stand...."

"Ju swear tell tru thole tru noth buth tru thelpugod?"

"I do."

McNiven, in the direct examination, asked only such questions as
Charity easily answered with proud denials of guilt. Beattie began
the cross-examination with a sneering scorn of her good faith.

"Mrs. Cheever, you are the co-respondent in this case of Dyckman
_versus_ Dyckman?"

"I am."

"And on this night you went motoring with defendant?"

"Yes."

"Was his wife with you?"

"No; you see--"

"Was any other person with you?"

"You see, it was a new car and it was only our intention to--"

"Was any other person with you?"

"No."

"And you spent the night with the defendant in the Viewcrest Inn?"

"That is hardly the way I should put it."

"Answer the question, please."

"I will not answer such an insulting question."

"I beg your pardon most humbly. Were you registered as the
defendant's wife?"

McNiven's voice: "I 'bject. There is no evidence witness even saw
the book."

The judge: "Objection s'tained."

"Well, then, Mrs. Cheever, did you see the defendant write in
the book?"

"I--I--perhaps I did--"

"Perhaps you did. You heard the waiter Magruder testify here
awhile ago that he insisted on defendant registering, and defendant
reluctantly complied. Do you remember that?"

"I--I--I believe I do. But I didn't see what he wrote."

"You didn't see what he wrote. Exhibit A shows that he wrote '_Mr.
and Mrs. James Dysart_.' You heard the handwriting experts testify
that the writing was Dyckman's. But you did not see the writing. Did
you not, however, hear the waiter speak of you as the defendant's
wife?"

"Well--I may have heard him."

"You didn't tell him that you were not the defendant's wife?"

"I didn't speak to the waiter at all. It was a very embarrassing
situation."

"It must have been. So you did not deny that you were the defendant's
wife?"

"You see, it was like this. When Mr. Dyckman asked me to try his
new car--"

"You did not deny that you were the defendant's wife?"

"I hadn't the faintest idea that we could have gone so far--"

"Answer the question!"

"But I'm coming to that--"

The judge: "Witness will answer question."

"But, your Honor, can't I explain? Has he a right to ask these
horrible things in that horrible way?"

The lawyer: "We are trying to get at the horrible truth. But if you
prefer not to answer I will not press the point. The waiter showed
you to the parlor, saying that the rest of the hotel was occupied?"

"Yes."

"He left you there together, you and the defendant?"

"Well, he went away, but--"

"And left you together. He so testified. He also testified that he
found you together the next morning. Is that true?"

"Oh, that's outrageous. I refuse to answer."

Jim Dyckman rose from his chair in a frenzy of wrath. His lawyer,
McNiven, pressed him back and pleaded with him in a whisper to
remember the court. He yielded helplessly, cursing himself for
his disgraceful lack of chivalry.

The judge spoke sternly. "Witness will answer questions of counsel
or--"

"But, your Honor, he is trying to make me say that I--Oh, it's
loathsome. I didn't. I didn't. He has no right!"

When a woman's hair is caught in a traveling belt and she is drawn
backward, screaming, into the wheels of a great machinery that will
mangle her beauty if it does not helplessly murder her there are not
many people whose hearts are hard enough to withhold pity until they
learn whether or not her plight was due to carelessness.

There are always a few, however, who will add their blame to her
burden, and they usually invoke the name of justice for their
lethargy of spirit.

Yet even the cruelty of that severity is a form of self-protection
against a shattering grief; and a perfect heart would have pity even
for the pitiless, since they, too, are the victims of their own
carelessness; they, too, are drawn backward into the soul-crushing
cogs of the world.

Mrs. Charity Coe Cheever, as good a woman as ever was, was being
dragged to the meeting-point of great wheels, but she had turned
about and was fighting to escape, at least with what was dearer
than her life. The pain and the terror were supreme, and even if
she wrenched free from destruction it would be at the cost of
lasting scars. Yet she fought.

It had been all too easy for the infuriated Kedzie Dyckman to
entangle Charity in the machinery. Kedzie was a little terrified
at the consequences of her own act, though she would have said that
she did it in self-defense and to punish an outrage upon her rights.
But when persons set out to punish other persons, it is not often
that their own hands are altogether innocent.

If the Christly edict, "Let him that is without sin cast the first
stone," had been followed out there would never have been another
stone cast. And one might ask if the world would have been, or could
have been, the worse for that abstention. For, whatever else may be
true, the venerable practices of justice have been false and futile.

And now, nearly two thousand years later, after two thousand years
more of heartbreaking history, an increasing few are asking bitterly
if punishment has ever paid.

Vaguely imagining on one side the infinite misery and ugliness
of the dungeons and tortures, the disgraces and executions of
the ages with their counter-punishment on the inquisitors and the
executioners, and setting against them that uninterrupted stream of
deeds we call crimes, what is the picture but a ghastly vanity--an
eternal process of trying to dam the floods of old Nile by flinging
in forever poor wretch after poor wretch to drown unredeemed and
unavailing?

Charity was the latest sacrifice. If she had been guilty of loving
too wildly well, or of drifting unconsciously into a situation where
opportunity made temptation irresistible, there would be a certain
reaction to pity after she had been definitely condemned. There are
at times advantages in weakness, as women well know, though Charity
despised them now.

Kedzie's lawyer, however, felt it good tactics to assume now the
pose of benevolent patience with an erring one. Seeing that Charity
was in danger of stirring the hearts of the jurors by her suffering,
he forestalled their sympathy and murmured:

"I will wait till Mrs. Cheever has regained control of herself."

Instantly Charity's pride quickened in her. She wanted none of
that beast's pity. She responded to the strange sense of discipline
before fate that makes a man walk soldierly to the electric chair;
inspires a caught spy to stand placidly before his own coffin and
face the firing-squad; led Joan of Arc after one panic of terror
to wait serene among the crackling fagots.

The lawyer was relieved. He had been afraid that Charity would weep.
He resumed the probe:

"And now, Mrs. Cheever, if you are quite calm I will proceed. I
regret the necessity of asking these questions, but you were not
compelled to come into court. You came of your own volition, did
you not?"

"Yes."

"Witnesses have testified and you have not denied that you arrived
at the Viewcrest Inn late at night; that you saw the defendant
register; that you and he went to the only room left; that the
waiter left you together and found you together the next morning.
You have heard that testimony, have you not?"

"Yes."

"Knowing all this, do you still claim that your conduct was above
reproach?"

"For discretion, no. I was foolish and indiscreet."

"And that was all?"

"Yes."

"You are innocent of the charge, then?"

"Yes."

"Do you ask the jury to believe you?"

"I ask them to--yes! Yes! I ask them to."

"Do you expect them to?"

"Oh, they ought to."

"If you had been guilty of misconduct would you admit it?"

"Yes."

"Do you expect them to believe that?"

"If they knew me they would."

"Well, we haven't all the privilege of knowing you as well as the
defendant does. You may step down, Mrs. Cheever, thank you."

McNiven rose. "One moment, Mrs. Cheever. You testified on direct
examination that the defendant left you immediately after the waiter
did?"

"Yes."

"And that he did not return till the next morning, just before the
waiter returned."

"Yes."

"That is all, Mrs. Cheever."

McNiven would have done better to leave things alone. The sturdy
last answer of Charity and the unsportsmanlike sneer of Kedzie's
lawyer had inclined the jury her way. McNiven's explanation awoke
again the skeptic spirit.

Charity descended from her pillory with a feeling that she had said
none of the things she had planned to say. The eloquence of her
thoughts had seemed incompatible somehow with the witness-stand.
At a time when she needed to say so much she had said so little
and all of it wrong.




CHAPTER XIII

Jim Dyckman's heart was so wrung with pity for Charity when she
stepped down and sought her place in a haze of despair that he
resolved to make a fight for her himself. He insisted on McNiven's
calling him to the stand, though McNiven begged him to let ill
enough alone.

He took the oath with a fierce enthusiasm that woke the jury a
little, and he answered his own lawyer's questions with a fervor
that stirred a hope in the jury's heart, a sorely wrung heart it
was, for its pity for Charity was at war with its pity for Kedzie,
and its admiration for Jim Dyckman, who was plainly a gentleman and
a good sport even if he had gone wrong, could only express itself
by punishing Kedzie, whose large eyes and sweet mouth the jury could
not ignore or resist.

When his own lawyer had elicited from Jim the story as he wanted
it told, which chanced to be the truth, McNiven abandoned him to
Beattie with the words:

"Your witness."

Beattie was in fine fettle. He had become a name talked about
transcontinentally, and now he was crossing swords with the famous
Dyckman. And Dyckman was at a hideous disadvantage. He could
only parry, he could not counter-thrust. There was hardly a trick
forbidden to the cross-examiner and hardly a defense permitted to
the witness.

And yet that very helplessness gave the witness a certain shadowy
aide at his side.

Jim's heart was beating high with his fervor to defend Charity, but
it stumbled when Beattie rose and faced him. And Beattie faced him
a long while before he spoke.

A slow smile crept over the lawyer's mien as he made an excuse for
silence out of the important task of scrubbing his eye-glasses.

Before that alkaline grin Jim felt his faith in himself wavering.
He remembered unworthy thoughts he had entertained, graceless
things he had done; he felt that his presence here as a knight of
unassailable purity was hypocritical. He winced at all points from
the uncertainty as to the point to be attacked. His life was like
a long frontier and his enemy was mobilized for a sudden offensive.
He would know the point selected for the assault when he felt the
assault. The first gun was that popular device, a supposititious
question.

"Mr. Dyckman, you are accused of--well, we'll say co-respondence
with the co-respondent. You have denied your guilt in sundry
affidavits and on the witness-stand here. Remembering the classic
and royal ideal of the man who 'perjured himself like a gentleman,'
and assuming--I say 'assuming' what you deny--that you had been
guilty, would you have admitted it?"

"I could not have been guilty."

"Could not? Really! you astonish me! And why not, please?"

"Because Mrs. Cheever would never have consented. She is
a good woman."

This unexpected answer to the old trick question jolted Beattie
perceptibly and brought the jury forward a little. The tears gushed
to Charity's eyes and she felt herself unworthy a champion so pious.

Beattie acknowledged the jolt with a wry smile and returned:

"Very gallant, Mr. Dyckman; you want to be a gentleman and avoid
the perjury, too. But I must ask you to answer the question.
Suppose you had been guilty."

Silence.

"Answer the question!"

Silence.

"Will his Honor kindly instruct the witness to answer the question?"

Jim broke in, "His Honor cannot compel me to suppose something
that is impossible."

The jury rejoiced unwillingly, like the crowd in the bleachers
when a man on the opposing team knocks a home run. The jury liked
Jim better. But what they liked, after all, was what they falsely
imagined. They assumed that Jim had been out on a lark and got
caught and was putting up a good scrap for his lady friend. He was
a hum-dinger, and no wonder the lady fell for him. Into such slang
their souls translated the holiness of his emotions, and they voted
him guilty even in awarding him their admiration for his defense.

Beattie paused again, then suddenly asked, "Mr. Dyckman, how long
have you loved Mrs. Cheever?"

"What do you mean by 'loved'?"

"It is a familiar word. Answer the question."

"I have admired Mrs. Cheever since she was a child. We have always
been friends."

"Your 'friendship' was considerably excited when she married
Mr. Cheever, wasn't it?"

"I--I thought he was unworthy of her."

"Was that why you beat him up in a fist fight at your club?"

This startled the entire court. Even reporters who had missed the
news were excited. McNiven sprang to his feet, crying:

"I 'bject! There is no evidence before the court that there ever
was such a fight. The question is incompirrelvimmaterial."

"S'tained!" said the judge.

Beattie was satisfied. The arrow had been pulled out, but its poison
remained. He made use of another of his tantalizing pauses, then:

"It was shortly afterward that Mrs. Cheever divorced her husband,
was it not?"

"I 'bject," McNiven barked.

"S'tained!" the judge growled.

"Let us get back to the night when you and Mrs. Cheever went
a-motoring." Beattie smiled. "There was a beautiful moon on that
occasion, I believe."

The jury grinned. The word "moon" meant foolishness. Beattie took
Jim through the story of that ride and that sojourn at the tavern,
and every question he asked condemned Jim to a choice of answers,
either alternative making him out ridiculously virtuous or criminal.

Beattie rehearsed the undenied facts, but substituted for the
glamour of innocence in bad luck the sickly glare of cynicism. He
asked Jim if he had ever heard of the expression, "The time, the
place, and the girl." He had the jury snickering at the thought of
a big rich youth like Jim being such a ninny, such a milksop and
mollycoddle, as to defy an opportunity so perfect.

The public mind has its dirt as well as its grandeurs; the pool
that mirrors the sky is easily roiled and muddied. It was possible
for the same people to abhor Jim and Charity for being guilty and
to feel that if they were not guilty with such an occasion they
were still more contemptible.

Thus ridicule, which shakes down the ancient wrongs and the tyrants'
pretenses, shakes down also the ancient virtues and the struggling
ideals.

Finally Beattie said, "You say you left the fair corespondent
alone in the hotel parlor?"

"I did."

"All alone?"

"Yes."

"And you went out into the night, as the saying is?"

"Yes."

"But you testified that it was raining."

"It was."

"You went out into the rain?"

"Yes."

"To cool your fevered brow?"

Silence from Jim; shrieks of laughter from the silly spectators.
The jury was shattered with amusement; the judge wiped a grin
from his lips. Beattie resumed:

"Where did you sleep?"

"In the office chair."

"You paid for the parlor! You registered! And you slept in the
chair!" [Gales of laughter. His Honor threatens to clear the court.]
"Who saw you asleep in the chair?"

"I don't know--I was asleep."

"Are you sure that you did not just dream about the chair?"

"I am sure."

"That's all."

Jim stepped down, feeling idiotic.

There is a dignity that survives and is illumined by flames of
martyrdom, but there is no dignity that is improved by a bladder-
buffeting. Jim slunk back to his place and cowered, while the
attorneys made their harangues.

McNiven spoke with passion and he had the truth on his side, but
it lacked the convincing look. Beattie rocked the jury-box with
laughter and showed a gift for parodying seriousness that would
carry him far on his career. Then he switched to an ardent defense
of the purity of the American home, and ennobled the jury to a
knighthood of chivalry and of democracy. As he pointed out, the
well-known vices of the rich make every household unsafe unless
they are sternly checked by the dread hand of the law.

He called upon the jury to inflict on the Lothario a verdict that
would not only insure comfort to the poor little woman whose home
had been destroyed, but would also be severe enough to make even
a multimillionaire realize and remember that the despoiler of the
American home cannot continue on his nefarious path with impunity.

The judge gave a long and solemn charge to the jury. It was fair
according to the law and the evidence, but the evidence had been
juggled by the fates.

The jury retired and remained a hideous while.




CHAPTER XIV

It was only a pleasant clubby discussion of the problem of Jim's
and Charity's innocence that delayed the jury's verdict. One or two
of the twelve had a sneaking suspicion that they had told the truth,
but these were laughed out of their wits by the wiser majority who
were not such fools as to believe in fairy-stories.

As one of the ten put it: "That Dyckman guy may have gone out into
the rain, but, believe me, he knew enough to come in out of the
wet."

A very benevolent old gentleman who sympathized with everybody
concerned made a little speech:

"It seems to me, gentlemen, that when a man and wife have quarreled
as bitterly as those two and have taken their troubles to court,
there is no use trying to force them together again. If we give
a verdict of not guilty, that will leave Mr. and Mrs. Dyckman
married. But they must hate each other by now and that would mean
lifelong misery and sin for both. So I think we will save valuable
time and satisfy everybody best by giving a verdict of guilty. It
won't hurt Dyckman any."

"What about Mrs. Cheever?"

"Oh, she's gotta lotta money."

None of the jury had ever had so much as that and it was equivalent
to a good time and the answer to all prayers, so they did not
fret about Charity's future. On the first ballot, after a proper
reminiscence of the amusing incidents of the trial they proceeded
to a decision. The verdict was unanimous that Jim was guilty as
charged. Charity was not to get her forty dollars nor her good name.

When the jurors filed back into the box the court came to attention
and listened to the verdict.

Jim and Charity were dazed as if some footpad had struck them
over the head with a slingshot. Kedzie was hysterical with relief.
She had suffered, too, throughout the trial. And now she had been
vindicated.

She went to the jury and she shook hands with each member and
thanked him.

"You know I accept the verdict as just one big beautiful birthday
present." It was not her birthday, but it sounded well, and she
added, "I shall always remember your kindly faces. Never can I
forget one of you."

Two days later she met one of the unforgetable jurors on the street
and did not recognize him. He had been one-twelfth of her knightly
champions, but she cut him dead as an impertinent stranger when he
tried to speak to her. She cut Skip Magruder still deader when he
tried to ride home with her.

He came to call and showed an inclination to settle down as a member
of Kedzie's intimate circle. He had speedily recovered from his
first awe at the sight of her splendor. Finding himself necessary
to her, he grew odiously presumptuous. She had not dared to rebuke
him. Now she thought she would have to buy him off. Skip had had his
witness fees and his expenses, and nothing else for his pains. Then
Beattie warned Kedzie that it would look bad to pay Skip any money;
it might cast suspicion on his testimony. Kedzie would not have done
that for worlds. Besides, when she learned what Mr. Beattie's fee
was to be, she felt too poor to pay anybody anything.

The only thing she could do, therefore, was to remind Skip of the
beautiful old song, "Lovers once, but strangers now."

"Besides, Skippie dear, I'm engaged."

"Already?"

"Yes."

"You woiked that excuse on me when you tried to explain why you
toined me down when I wrote you the letter at the stage door."

"Yes, I did."

"Say, Anitar, you'd oughter git some new material. Your act is
growin' familiar."

"I don't know what you mean."

"Oh no! You wasn't never in vawdvul, was you, oh, no! not a tall!"
Kedzie played her pout on him, but Skip glared at her, shook his
head, kicked himself with his game leg, and said, "I gotta give
you credit, Anitar, you're the real thing as a user."

"A what?" said Kedzie.

"A user," he explained in his elliptical style. "You're one them
dames uses a fella like he was a napkin, then trows him down. You
used me twice and used me good. I desoived the second one, for I'm
the kind o' guy gets his once and comes back for more in the same
place. I'd go tell Jimmie Dyckman I was a liar but I ain't anxious
to be run up for poijury, and I ain't achin' to advertise what a
John I been. So long, Anitar, and Gaw delp the next guy crosses
your pat'."

That was the last Kedzie saw of Skip. She did not miss him. She hated
him for annoying her pride and she hated the law that she used for
her divorce, because it required her to wait three months before the
interlocutory decree should become final. The time was hazardously
long yet short, in a sense, for her alimony was to end at the end of
three months if she married again, and marrying again was her next
ambition. The judge had fixed her alimony at $30,000 a year, and an
allowance for costs. Beattie tried to make a huge cost settlement,
but McNiven knew of Kedzie's interest in the Marquess and he refused
the bait. So Kedzie got only $7,500. She found it a ruinously small
capital to begin life as a Marchioness on--she that had had only
two dollars to begin life in New York on! The Marquess was very
nice about it, and said he didn't want any of Dyckman's dirty money.
But Kedzie thought of life in England with alarm, especially as
she had the American comic-opera idea that all foreign peers are
penniless. She dreaded to think what might happen in that three
months' interregnum between husband II and husband III. Enough was
happening in the rest of the world.

The _annus miserabilis_ 1917 had begun with the determination
of the German Empire to render the seas impassable and to withdraw
the pledge to President Wilson that merchant ships should not be
sunk till the passengers and crew had a chance to get into open
boats. On January 31, 1917, "Frightfulness" began anew, and the
undersea fleets, enormously increased, were set loose in shoals.
Having no commerce of her own afloat, it was safe for Germany to
sink any vessel anywhere.

Kedzie began to wonder if she would ever dare to sail for he
future ancestral home, and if she did how long her ship would
last.

On February 3d the U-53, which had sunk Strathdene's ship off
Newport, sank an American freighter bound from Galveston to
Liverpool. Other American vessels followed her into the depths.
On February 27th the Laconia, of 18,000 tons burden, was torpedoed
and twelve passengers died of exposure in the bitter weather. In
one of the open boats a Catholic priest administered the last rites
to seven persons.

Mrs. Hoy, of Chicago, died in the arms of her daughter and her body
slipped into the icy waves, to be followed by her daughter's a few
minutes later.

These seemed to make up a sufficient total of American women
drowned, and on the next day the President declared that the
long-awaited "overt act" had been committed. He asked Congress
to declare that peace with Germany was ended. Her ambassador was
sent home and ours called home.

In March the British captured Bagdad and the Germans suddenly
retreated along a sixty-mile front in France; then the Russian
revolution abruptly changed the almighty Czar into a weeping
prisoner digging snow. And the vast burying-ground of Siberia
gave up its living dead in a sudden apocalypse of freedom. Fifty
thousand sledges sped across the steppes laden with returning
exiles, chains stil dangling at many a wrist from the dearth of
blacksmiths to strike them off.

Kedzie did not value the privilege of living in times when epochs
of history were crowded into weeks and cycles completed in days.
The revolution in Russia disturbed Kedzie as it did many a monarch,
and she said to her mother:

"What a shame to treat the poor Czar so badly! Strathie and I were
planning to visit Russia after the war, too. The Czar was awfully
nice to Strathie once and I was sure we'd be invited to live right
in the Duma or the Kremlin or whatever they call the palace. And
now they've got a cheap and nasty old republic over there! And
they're talking of having republics everywhere. What could be more
stupid? As if everybody was born free and equal. Mixing all the
aristocrats right up with the common herd!"

Mrs. Thropp agreed that it was simply terrible.

"Do you know what?" Kedzie gasped.

"What?" her mother echoed.

"I've just had a hunch. I'll bet that by the time I get married to
Strathie there'll be nothing left but republics, and no titles at
tall. His people came over with Henry the Conqueror and his title
will last just long enough for me to reach for it, and then--woof!
Wouldn't it be just my luck to become plain Mrs. Strathdene after
all I've had to go through! Honestly, m'mah, don't I just have the
dog-on'dest luck!"

"It's perfectly awful," said Mrs. Thropp, "but bad luck can't go
on forever."

On April 2d the future Mrs. Strathdene was cheered by an
extraordinary spectacle--newspapers in the Metropolitan Opera
House! Kedzie was there with her waning Marquess. The occasion
was rare enough in itself, for an American opera was being heard:
"The Canterbury Pilgrims," with Mr. Reginald De Koven's music to
Mr. Percy Mackaye's text.

Suddenly, in the _entr'acte_ the unheard-of thing--the
newspapers--appeared in the boxes and about the house! People
spread evening extras on the rails and read excitedly that President
Wilson had gone to Congress and asked it to declare that a state of
war existed and had existed.

The Italian manager directed the Polish conductor to play "The
Star-Spangled Banner" and the three thousand men and women of the
audience made a chorus on the obverse side of the curtain.

Mr. Gerard, lately returned from Germany, called for "Three cheers
for President Wilson," and there were loud huzzahs for him and for
the Allies.

"You and I are allies now," Kedzie murmured to the Marquess. She
thought a trifle better of her country.

The Austrian prima donna fainted and could not appear in the last
act, and everybody went home expecting to see the vigor of Uncle Sam
displayed in a swift and tremendous delivery of a blow long, long
withheld.

The vigor was displayed in a tremendous delivery of words far better
withheld.

It was a week before Congress agreed that war existed and over a
month passed before Congress agreed upon the nature of the army to
be raised. Nearly four months passed before the draft was made.

Jim Dyckman was almost glad of the delay, for it gave him hope
of settling his spiritual affairs in time to be a soldier. He was
determined to marry Charity as soon as the three months' probation
term was over. But Charity said no! Cowering in seclusion from the
eyes of her world, she cherished a dream that when the war broke and
the dead began to topple and the wounded to bleed, she might expiate
the crime she had not committed, by devoting to her own people her
practised mercies. She was afraid to offer them now, or even to make
her appearance among the multitudinous associations that sprang up
everywhere in a frantic effort to make America ready in two weeks
for a war that had been inevitable for two years. Not only a war
was to be fought, but a world famine.

Charity was ashamed to show her white face even at the Red Cross.
She busied herself with writing checks for the snow-storm of appeals
that choked her mail. Otherwise she pined in idleness, refusing more
than ever the devotion that Jim offered her now in a longing that
increased with denial.

She suffered infinitely, yet mocked her own sufferings as petty
trifles. She contrasted them with what the millions on millions
of Europe's men were enduring as they huddled in the snow-drenched,
grenade-spattered trenches, or agonized in all their wounds out in
the No-Man's Land between the trenches. She told herself that her
own heartaches were negligible, despicable against the innumerable
anguishes of the women who saw their men, their old men, their
young men, their lads, going into the eternal mills of the war,
while hunger and loneliness and toil unknown to women before made
up their daily portion.

She accused herself for still remaining apart from that continental
sisterhood of grief. All America seemed to be playing Hamlet,
debating, deferring, letting irresolution inhibit every necessary
duty.

Since her country had disowned her and refused her justice or
chivalry, she was tempted to disown her country and claim citizenship
among those who could fight and could sacrifice and could endure.

It was not easy to persuade a captain to take a woman passenger
aboard his ship, now that the German ambition was to sink a million
tons a month, but she resolved again to go if she had to stowaway.

First she would finish her affairs, make her will, and burn her
letters. She had neglected to change the testament she had signed
when she became Peter Cheever's wife, and took a pride in making him
her sole heir. It would be ridiculous to make him such a post-mortem
gift now, now that he had not only money enough, but a wife that
satisfied him, and a child.

She wondered whom to leave her money to. Jim Dyckman's name kept
recurring to her and she smiled at that, for he had more money than
he could use. Besides, the mention of his name in her will would
confirm the public belief in their intrigue. She had nobody to
inflict her inheritance upon but a few relatives, mostly rich
enough. She decided to establish a fund for her own orphans, the
children of other women whom she had adopted.

Making a will is in sort a preliminary death. Making hers, Charity
felt herself already gone, and looked back at life with a finality
as from beyond the grave. It was a frightful thing to review her
journey from a lofty angel's-eye view.

Her existence looked very petty. Now that her hope and her senses
were ended, she felt a grudge against the world that she had got so
little out of. She had tried to be a good woman, and her altruism
had won her such a bad name that if Dr. Mosely should preach her
funeral sermon he would feel that he had revealed a wonderful spirit
of forbearance in leaving it unmentioned that she was an abandoned
divorcee.

If she had been actually guilty of an intrigue with Jim Dyckman
Dr. Mosely would have forgiven her even more warmly, because it was
a woman taken in actual adultery who was forgiven, while Charity
had tactlessly fought the charge and demanded vindication instead
of winsomely appealing for pity.

By a roundabout road of self-surrender she had come to the same
destination that she might have reached by the straight path of
self-indulgence. She was perilously near to resolving that she had
been a fool not to have taken happiness, physical happiness, first.
A grand red passion seemed so much more beautiful than a petty blue
asceticism.

When she got home from the will-making session with McNiven she
began to go over her papers and close the books of her years.
She attacked old heaps of bundles of her husband's letters and
telegrams, and burned them with difficulty in her fireplace.

She felt no temptation to glance over them, though her lip curled
in a grimace of sardonic disgust to consider how much Peter Cheever
had been to her and how little he was to her now. The first parcels
she burned were addressed to "Miss Charity Coe." How far off it
seemed since she had been called "Miss"!

She had been a girl when Cheever's written and spoken words inflamed
her. They blazed now as she had blazed. Into that holocaust had gone
her youth, her illusions, her virginity, her bridehood, her wifely
trust. And all that was left was a black char.

She came upon letters from Jim Dyckman, also, a few. She flung them
into the fire with the rest. He had had nothing from her except
friendship and girlish romance and a grass-widow's belated affection.
Crimson thoughts stole through her dark heart like the lithe blazes
interlacing the letters; she wondered if she would have done better
to have followed desire and taken love instead of solitude.

She knew that she could have made Jim hers long ago with a little
less severity, a less harsh rebuff. The Church condemned her for
openly divorcing her husband. She might have kept him on the leash
and carried on the affair with Jim that Cheever accused her of if
Jim had been complacent and stealthy. Or, she might have kept Jim
at her heels till she was rid of Cheever and then have married him.
She would have saved him at least from floundering through the marsh
where that Kedzie-o'-the-wisp had led him to ultimate disaster.

And now that she had taken stock of her past and put it into the
fire, she felt strangely exiled. She had no past, no present, and
a future all hazy. Her loneliness was complete. She had to talk
to some one, and she telephoned to Jim Dyckman, making her good-bys
an excuse.

It was the first time he had been permitted to hear her voice for
weeks, and the lonely joy that cried out in his greeting brought
warm tears to her dull, dry eyes.

He heard her weeping and he demanded the right to come to see her.
She refused him and cut off his plea, hoping that he would come,
anyway, and waiting tremulously till the door-bell rang with a
forgotten thrill of a caller, a lover calling.

Her maid, who brought her Jim's name, begged with her eyes that
he should not be turned away again. Charity nodded and prinked
a little and went down-stairs into Jim's arms.

He took her there as if she belonged there and she felt that she
did, though she protested, feebly:

"You are not unmarried yet."

They were in that No-Man's-Land. She was neither maid, wife, nor
widow, but divorcee. He was neither bachelor, husband, nor widower;
he was not even a divorce. He was a _Nisi Prius_.




CHAPTER XV


The childish old fates played one of their cheapest jokes on Jim
Dyckman when, after they had dangled Charity Coe just out of his
reach for a lifetime, they flung her at his head. They do those
things. They waken the Juliets just a moment too late to save
the Romeos and themselves.

Jim had revered Charity as far too good for him, and now everybody
wondered if he would do the right thing by her. Prissy Atterbury
in a burst of chivalry said it when he said:

"Jim's no gentleman if he doesn't marry Charity."

Pet put it in a more womanly way:

"Unless he's mighty spry she'll nab him. Trust her!"

Among the few people who had caught a glimpse of Charity, no one had
been quite cruel enough to say those things to her face, but Charity
imagined them. Housed with her sick and terrified imagination for
companion, she had imagined nearly everything dismal.

And now, when, by the mere laws of gravitation, she had floated into
Jim Dyckman's arms for a moment, she heard the popular doom of them
both in the joke he attempted:

"Charity, I've got to marry you to make you an honest woman."

She wrenched free of his embrace with a violence that staggered him.
He saw that she was taking his effort at playfulness seriously, even
tragically.

"No, no, Jim!" she gasped. "I've brought you enough trouble and
enough disgrace. I won't let you ruin your life by marrying me
out of pity."

"Pity! Good God!" Jim groaned. "Why, you don't think I meant that,
do you? I was just trying to be funny, because I was so happy.
I'll promise never to try to be funny again. It was like saying to
Venus, 'You're a homely old thing, but I'll let you cook for me';
or saying to--whoever it was was the Goddess of Wisdom, 'You don't
know much, but'--Why, Charity Coe, you're Venus and Minerva and all
the goddesses rolled into one."

Charity shook her head.

He roared: "If it's pity you're talking about, isn't it about time
you had a little for me? Life won't be worth a single continental
damn to me if I don't get you."

Charity had needed something of this sort for a long time. It
sounded to her like a serenade by the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
Her acknowledgment was a tearful, smileful giggle-sob:

"Honestly?"

"Honest-to-God-ly!"

"All right, as soon as you're a free man fetch the parson, for I'm
pretty tired of being a free woman."

Jim had learned from McNiven that a part of his freedom, when he got
it, would be a judicial denial of the right to surrender it for five
years. He had learned that if he wanted to marry Charity he must
persuade her over into New Jersey. It did not please Jim to have to
follow the example of Zada and Cheever, and it hit him as a peculiar
cruelty that he and Charity had to accept not only an unearned
increment of scandal in the verdict of divorce, but also a marriage
contrary to the laws of New York.

New York would respect the ceremonies of New Jersey, but there would
be a shadow on the title. Still, such marriages were recognized by
the public with little question, just as in the countries where
divorce is almost or quite impossible society of all grades has
always countenanced unions not too lightly entered into or continued.
In such countries words like "mistress," "concubine," and "morganatic
wife" take on a decided respectability with a touch of pathos rather
than reproach.

Jim had come to beg Charity to accept a marriage with an impediment.
He had expected a scene when he proposed a flight across the river
and a return to Father Knickerbocker with a request for pardon.
But her light suggestion of a religious ceremony threw him into
confusion. He mumbled:

"Is a parson absolutely necessary?"

Charity's lips set into a grim line.

"I'll be married by a parson or I'll not be married at all. The
Church has enough against me on account of my divorce and this
last ghastly thing. To get married outside the Church would cut
me off entirely from everything that's sacred. There won't be
any difficulty about getting a parson, will there?"

"Oh no, not at all!" Jim protested, "only--oh no, not at all,
except--"

"Only what? Except what?"

"You'll have to go to New Jersey to be married."

"Why should I?"

"Entirely on my account, honey. It's because I'm in disgrace."

This way of putting it brought her over that sill with a rush.
To be able to endure something for him was a precious ability.
She hugged him devoutly, then put his arms away.

When he left her he had a brilliant inspiration. He thought how
soothing it would be to her bruised heart, what carron-oil to her
blistered reputation, if he got Doctor Mosely to perform the
ceremony. Jim was so delighted with the stroke of genius that he
went immediately to the pastor's house. The dear old man greeted
him with a subdued warmth.

"This is an unusual privilege, dear boy. I haven't seen you for--oh,
ever so long. Of course, I have read of you--er--that is--what--to
what am I indebted for--"

"You perform marriages, don't you?"

"That is one of my perilous prerogatives. But, of course, I can't
guarantee how well my marriages will wear in these restless times."

Jim braved a flippancy: "Then, being an honest dealer, you replace
any damaged article, of course?"

"I am afraid I could hardly go so far as that."

"Could you go as far as New Jersey?"

"In my time I have ventured into Macedonia. But why do you ask?"

"You see, in a day or two, I'll be free from my present--that is,
my absent wife; and I wanted to know if you could come over and
marry me."

"But I thought--I fear--do you mean to say you are marrying some
young woman from over there?"

"I'm marrying Charity Coe."

"My dear, dear boy! Really! You can't, you know! She has been
divorced and so have you."

"Yes, all quite legally."

"And you ask me to join your hands in holy matrimony?"

"No, just plain legal matrimony. I was joined in holy matrimony
once, and I don't insist on that part of it again. But Charity
wants a clergyman and I don't mind."

"Really, my son, you know better than to assume this tone to me.
You've been away from church too long."

"Well, if you want to get me back, fasten me to Charity. You know
she's the best woman that ever lived."

"She is a trifle too rebellious to merit that tribute, I fear."

"Well, give her another chance. She has had enough hard knocks.
You ought to go to her rescue."

"Do you think that to be the duty of the Church?"

"It used to be, didn't it? But don't get me into theology. I can't
swim. The point is, will you marry Charity to me?"

"No!"

"Wouldn't you marry her to any man?"

"Only to one."

"Who's that?"

"Her former husband."

"But he's married to another woman."

"I do not recognize that marriage."

"Good Lord! Would you like to see Charity married to Cheever
again?"

"Yes."

"To Peter Cheever?"

"Yes."

"Whew! Say, Doctor, that's going it pretty strong."

"I do not care to discuss the sacraments with you in your present
humor."

"Did you read the trial of that woman last week who killed her
husband and was acquitted? Mrs. What's-her-name? You must have
read it."

"I pay little attention to the newspaper scandals."

"You ought to--they're what make life what it is. Anyway, this woman
had a husband who turned out bad. He was a grafter and a gambler,
a drunkard and a brute. He beat her and their five children horribly,
and finally she divorced him. The law gave her her freedom in five
minutes and there was no fuss about it, because she was poor, and
the newspapers have no room for poor folks' marriage troubles--unless
they up and kill somebody.

"Well, this woman was getting along all right when some good
religious people got at her about the sin of her divorce and the
broken sacrament, and they kept at her till finally she consented
to remarry her husband--for the children's sake! There was great
rejoicing by everybody--except the poor woman. After the remarriage
he returned to his old ways and began to beat her again, and finally
she emptied a revolver into him."

"Horrible, horrible!"

"Wasn't it? The jury disagreed on the first trial. But on the second
the churchpeople who persuaded her to remarry him went on the stand
and confessed--or perhaps you would say, boasted--that they persuaded
her to remarry him. And then she was acquitted. And that's why the
civil law has always had to protect people from--"

Doctor Mosely turned purple at the implication and the insolence.
He scolded Jim loftily, but Jim did not cower. He was upheld by
his own religion, which was Charity Coe's right to vindication
and happiness.

At length he realized that he was harming Charity and not Doctor
Mosely. Suddenly he was apologizing humbly:

"I'm very much ashamed of myself. You're an older man and venerable,
and I--I oughtn't to have forgotten that."

"You ought not."

"I'll do any penance you say, if you'll only marry Charity and me."

"Don't speak of that again."

He thought of his old friend and attorney, money. He put that
forward.

"I'll pay anything."

"Mr. Dyckman!"

"I'll give the church a solid gold reredos or contribute any sum
to any alms--"

"Please go. I cannot tolerate any more."

Jim left the old man in such agitation that a reporter named Hallard,
who shadowed him, feeling in his journalistic bones that a big story
would break about him soon, noted his condition and called on Doctor
Mosely. He was still shaken with the storm of defending his ideals
from profanation, and Hallard easily drew from him an admission that
Mr. Dyckman was bent upon matrimony, also a scathing diatribe on the
remarriage of divorced persons as one of the signs of the increasing
degeneracy of public morals.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hallard's paper carried a lovely exclusive story the next morning
in noisy head-lines. The other newspapers enviously plagiarized
it and set their news-sleuths on Jim's trail. The clergy of all
denominations took up the matter as a theme of vital timeliness.

Jim and Charity were beautifully suited to the purposes of both
sorts; the newspapers that pulpiteered the news and wrote highly
moral editorials for sensation's sake; and the pulpiteers who
shouted head-lines and yellow journalism from their rostrums,
more for the purpose of self-advertisement than for any devotion
to Christly principles of sympathy and gentle comprehension.

Jim was stupefied to find himself once more pilloried and portraited
and ballyhooed in the newspapers. But he tightened his jaws and
refused to be howled from his path by any coyote pursuit.

His next thought was of the New Jersey clergyman who had married
him to Kedzie. He motored over to him.

Jim had told Dr. Mosely that clergymen ought to keep up with the
news. He found, to his regret, that the New Jersey dominie did.

He remembered Jim well and heard him out, but shook his head.
He explained why, patiently. He had been greatly impressed by the
action of the House of Deputies of the Protestant Episcopal Church
convened at St. Louis in October, 1916. A new canon had been proposed
declaring that "no marriage shall be solemnized in this Church
between parties, either of whom has a husband or wife still living,
who has been divorced for any cause arising after marriage."

This meant that the innocent party, as well as the guilty, should
be denied another chance. The canon had been hotly debated--so hotly
that one preacher referred to any wedding of divorced persons as
"filth marriage," and others were heard insisting that even Christ's
acceptance of adultery as a cause for divorce was an interpolation
in the text, and that the whole passage concerning the woman taken in
adultery was absent from some ancient manuscripts. A halt was called
to this dangerous line of argument, and one clergyman protested that
"the question of the integrity of the Scriptures is more important
than the question of marriage and divorce." Another clergyman
pleaded: "An indissoluble marriage is a fiction. What is the use of
tying the Church up to a fiction? It is our business to teach and
not to legislate." Eventually the canon was defeated. But many of
the clergy were determined to follow it, anyway.

In any case, not only was Charity divorced, but she had been involved
in Jim's divorce, and Jim, as the New Jersey preacher pointed out
to him, was denied remarriage even by the civil law of New York. The
appeal to New Jersey was plainly a subterfuge, and he begged Jim to
give Charity up.

"You don't know what you ask," Jim cried. "I'll find somebody with
a heart!" And he stormed out.




CHAPTER XVI

Jim reported to Charity his two defeats and the language he had heard
and read. Charity's conscience was so clean that her reaction was one
of wrath. She pondered her future and Jim's. She could not see what
either of them had done so vile that they should be sentenced to
celibacy for life, or more probably to an eventual inevitable horror
of outward conformity and secret intrigue.

She knew too many people whose wedlock had been a lifelong tolerance
of infamy on the part of one or both. Some of the bitterest enemies
of divorce were persons who had found it quite unnecessary. She
felt that to forgive and to forget became so anti-social a habit
in matrimony that no divorce could be worse.

She was afraid of herself, too. She dared not trust herself with life
alone. She was too human to be safe. Marriage with Jim would protect
him and her from each other and from the numberless temptations
awaiting them. Finally, there were no children in the matter.

All arguments prove too much and too little, and in the end become
simply our own briefs for our own inclinations. Charity's mood being
what it was, she adopted the line of reasoning that led to her own
ambition. She spent much time on her knees, but communed chiefly
with herself, and rose always confirmed in her belief that to marry
Jim Dyckman was the next great business of her existence.

Jim, too, had grown unwontedly earnest. The marriage denounced by
the religious had taken on a religious quality. He was inclined to
battle for it as for a creed, as the clergymen had battled vainly
for the new canon.

He, too, felt a spirit of genuflexion and wanted to speak to God
personally; to appeal to Him by a private petition as to a king
whose ministers denied mercy.

By his bed he sank down and prayed. He was very solemn, but too
uncertain of the solemn voice to use it. He half whispered, half
thought:

"O God, I don't know how you want me to act. I only know that my
heart keeps on calling for Charity and a home with her, and children
some day. There'll never be any children for either of us if we obey
the Church. Forgive me if I doubt what these preachers tell me, but
I just can't believe it to be your voice. If it is not your voice,
what is it that makes me feel it such a sin not to marry Charity?
I'm going to, God, unless you stop me. I may be making a big mistake,
but if I am you'll understand. You will not be mad at me any more
than I am mad at my dog when he misunderstands me, for I know he is
a good dog and wants to do what I want him to if he can only learn
what it is. If it is not your will that I should marry Charity tell
me now so that I can't misunderstand, for if you don't I'm going
ahead. If I have to take the punishment afterward, I'll take it
rather than leave that poor soul alone. Bless her, O God, and help
me. Amen."

And now both Charity and Jim were ready for battle. She set her hand
in Jim's and said that she would marry him in spite of all, but that
she would not give up her hope of being married by one of her own
faith until she had canvassed the entire clergy.

And then began one of the strangest quests ever undertaken, even
in this transitional period of matrimony as an institution--a quest
so strange that it would seem impossible if it had not actually
happened. Jim and Charity hunted a preacher and the press hunted
them.

While the journalists waited for the United States to enter the war
with soldiers, the reporters kept in practice by scouting after Jim
Dyckman and sniping him whenever he showed his head. He succeeded
only in getting his resignation from his regiment accepted. He
planned to sail for France and fight for France as soon as he had
married Charity.

When he failed to secure a minister by letter or telegram he set
forth to make personal visits. Sometimes Charity went with him so
that there should be no delay or time for a change of mood.

From city to town they went, from village to city, searching for
an Episcopalian clergyman to say the desired words. Jim offered any
bribery that might suffice, but ahead of him went his notoriety.

Many a warm-hearted clergyman felt sympathy for Jim and Charity and
longed to end their curious pilgrimage, but dared not brave the wrath
of his fellow-preachers or accept the unwelcome fame that awaited
his blessing, and the discipline that would be meted out to him.

Jim's picture was so widely published that when he eluded one crowd
another posse sprang up wherever he reappeared. His entrance into
a town was a signal for the clergy to scurry to cover. Some of them,
to put themselves on record and insure themselves against temptation,
denounced Jim and his attachee as traveling fiends, emissaries of
the devil.

The wealth that was their drag was proclaimed as their weapon.

The storm grew fiercer and the language more unrestrained. Jim and
Charity, reading in the papers the terms applied to them, cowered
and shuddered.

Charity grew haggard and peevish. Her obstinacy was hardly more than
a lockjaw of fright, the stubbornness of a drowning child afraid to
let go.

Jim was almost equally sick. The newspaper pursuit covered him with
chagrin. His good old name was precious to him, and he knew how his
mother and father were suffering at its abuse, as well as for him
in his fugitive distress.

Jim's mother was very much mother. She took into her breast every
arrow shot at him. When she saw him she held him fiercely in her
arms, her big frame aching with a Valkyrian ardor to lift the brave
warrior on a winged horse and carry him away from the earth.

It is hard for the best of mothers to love even the best of
daughters-in-law, for how can two fires prosper on the same fuel?
It had been a little too hard for Mrs. Dyckman to love Kedzie. It
was all too easy to hate her now and to denounce her till even Jim
winced.

"Don't think of her, mother," he pleaded. "Don't let's speak of
her any more. She's only one of my past mistakes. You never mention
those--why not let her drop?"

"All right, honey. You must forgive me. I'm only a sour old woman
and it breaks my heart to think of that little, common--"

"There you go again," her husband growled, sick with grief, too.
"Let the little cat go."

"What's killing me," Jim said, "is thinking of what I've brought on
Charity. It makes me want to die."

"But you'll have to live for her sake--and your mother's," said his
mother. "Charity's the only woman I know that's worth fighting for.
I've known her since she was born and I never knew her to do or say
one single petty thing. She hasn't got one of those qualities that
women hate so much in women."

"Then why should she have to suffer such persecution?" Jim cried.
"My God! is chivalry dead in the world?"

His father flung his arm around him and hugged him roughly. "Not
while there's a man like you to fight for a woman like her. I never
was so proud of anything as I am of being the father of a big fellow
like you, who can make a battle like yours for love of a woman."

"But why should I have to fight for her? Whose business is it but
ours that we want to get married decently and live together quietly?
Isn't this a free country?"

"Only the press is free," said his father. "And poor Charity is
getting nothing more than women have always got who've dared to ask
for their own way. They used to throw 'em to the lions, or bowstring
'em in the harems. And in the days of real chivalry they burned 'em
at the stake or locked 'em up in convents or castles. But don't you
worry, Jim, Charity has you for a champion and she's mighty lucky.
Go on and fight the muckers and the muck-rakers, and don't let the
reporters or the preachers scare you away from doing the one right
thing."

The newspapers kept within the almost boundless limits of the
libel law. Jim had publicity enough, and he did not care to add to
it by a libel suit, nor could he bring himself to make a personal
attack on any of his pursuers. His discretion took on the look
of poltroonery and he groveled in shame.

One bitter day he motored with Charity to a village where a
clergyman lived who had wearied of the persecution and volunteered
his offices. When they arrived his wife told Jim that he was
stricken ill. He had fretted himself into his bed.

Jim bundled Charity into his car and set forth again in a storm.
The car skidded and turned turtle in a ditch. By some chance neither
of them was more than bruised and muddied. The hamper of food was
spilled and broken and they had hours to wait by the roadside while
a wrecking crew came from the nearest city to right the car.

While they waited, forlorn and shivering, like two tramps rather
than like two malefactors of great wealth, their hunger drove them
to banquet on their little store.

Jim, gnawing at a crust of suspicious cleanliness, studied Charity
where she huddled in the shelter of a dripping tree, like a queen
driven forth into exile. And the tears poured from his eyes and
salted the bread. He had eaten the food of his own tears. He had
tasted life and found it bitter.

When the men came with the ropes and the tackle necessary and
slowly righted the car he found that its engine ran again and he
had speed and strength once more as his servants. He tried to
encourage Charity with a figure of speech.

"They've got us ditched, honey, for a while, but we'll get righted
soon and then life will be as smooth as smooth."

She tried to smile for his sake, but she had finished with hope.




CHAPTER XVII

While Jim and Charity sat by the roadside the Marchioness of
Strathdene, _nee_ Kedzie Thropp, of Nimrim, sat on a fine
cushion and salted with her tears the toasted English crumpet
she was having with her tea.

She had been married indeed, but the same ban that fell upon Jim's
remarriage had forbidden her the wedding of her dreams. She was
the innocent party to the divorce and she was married in a church.
But it was not of the Episcopal creed, which she was now calling the
Church of England. Kedzie-like, she still wanted what she could not
get and grieved over what she got. It is usual to berate people of
her sort, but they are no more to be blamed than other dyspeptics.
Souls, like stomachs, cannot always coordinate appetite and
digestion.

Kedzie had, however, found a husband who would be permanently
precious to her, since she would never be certain of him. Like
her, he was restless, volatile, and maintained his equilibrium as
a bicycle does only by keeping on going. He was mad to be off to
the clouds of France. There was a delay because ships were sailing
infrequently, and their departure was kept secret. Passengers had
to go aboard and wait.

Bidding "bon voyage" was no longer the stupid dock-party platitude
it had been. It was bidding "good-by" with faint hope of _"au
revoir."_ Ladies going abroad, even brides, thought little of
their deck costumes so long as they included a well-tailored
life-preserver.

Mrs. Thropp stared at Kedzie and breathed hard in her creaking
satin. And Adna looked out at her over the high collar that took
a nip at his Adam's apple every time he swallowed it.

The old parents were sad with an unwonted sorrow. They had money at
last and they had even been hauled up close to the aristocracy as
the tail to Kite Kedzie. But now they had time to realize that they
were to lose this pretty thing they had somehow been responsible
for yet unable to control. They had nearly everything else, so their
child was to be taken from them.

Suddenly they loved her with a grave-side ache. She was their baby,
their little girl, their youth, their beauty, their romance, their
daughter. And perhaps in a few days she would be shattered and dead
in a torpedoed ship. Perhaps in some high-flung lifeboat she would
be crouching all drenched and stuttering with cold and dying with
terror.

Mrs. Thropp broke into big sobs that jolted her sides and she fell
over against Adna, who did not know how to comfort her. He held
her in arms like a bear's and patted her with heavy paws, but she
felt on her head the drip-drip of his tears. And thus Kedzie by her
departure brought them together in a remarriage, a poor sort of
honeymoon wherein they had little but the bitter-sweet privilege
of helping each other suffer.

The picture of their welded misery brought Kedzie a return, too,
to her child hunger for parentage. She wanted a mother and a
father and she could not have them. She went to put her exquisite
arms about them and the three so dissimilar heads were grotesquely
united.

The Marquess of Strathdene pretended to be disgusted and stormed
out. But that was because he did not want to be seen making an ass
of himself, weeping as Bottom the Weaver wept. He flung away his
salted and extinguished cigarette and wondered what was the matter
with the world where nothing ever came out right.

His own mother was weeping all the time and her letters told always
of new losses. The newspapers kept printing stories of Strathdene's
chums being put away in a trench or a hospital, or falling from
the clouds dead.

And starvation was coming everywhere; in England there was talk
of famine, and all America had gone mad with fear of it. But still
the war went on in a universal suicide which nobody could stop, and
peace, the one thing that everybody wanted, was wanted by nobody
on any terms that anybody else would even discuss.

As he agonized with his philosophy and lighted another cigarette,
the street roared like hurricane. Below the windows the French
Mission was proceeding up Fifth Avenue. Marechal Joseph Joffre
and Rene Viviani were awakening tumult in the American heart and
stirring it to the rescue of France and of England and of Belgium
and Italy, with what outcome none could know. One could only know
that at last the great flood of war had encircled the United
States, reducing it to the old primeval problems and emotions:
how to get enough to eat, how to get weapons, how to find and beat
down the enemy, how to endure the farewells of fathers, mothers,
sons, sisters, sweethearts, wives. Everything was complex beyond
understanding for minds, but things were very simple for hearts;
they had only to ache with sorrow or wrath.

The Marchioness of Strathdene and her airy husband reached England
without being submarined, and there, to her great surprise, Kedzie
found a whole new universe of things not quite right. "If only it
were otherwise!" was still the perpetual alibi of contentment.




CHAPTER XVIII

From the glory of the festivals of alliance Jim Dyckman and Charity
Coe were absent. Both were so eager to be abroad in the battle that
they did not miss the flag-waving. But they wanted to cross the
sea together. The importance of this ambition tempted Charity to
a desperate conclusion that the formalities of her union with Jim
did not matter so long as they were together. Yet the risk of death
was so inescapable and she was so imbued with churchliness that
her dreams were filled with visions of herself dead and buried in
unhallowed ground, of herself and Jim standing at heaven's gate
and turned away for lack of a blessing on their union.

Her soul was about ready to break completely, but her body gave
out first. It was in a small town in New Jersey that they found
themselves weather-bound.

The sky seemed to rain ice-water and they took refuge in the
village's one hotel, a dismal place near the freight-station.
The entrance was up a narrow staircase, past a bar-room door.

The rooms were ill furnished and ill kept, and the noise of
screaming locomotives and jangling freight-cars was incessant.
But there was no other hospitality to be had in the town.

Jim left Charity at her door and begged her to sleep. Her dull
eyes and doddering head promised for her.

He went to his own room and laughed at the cheap wretchedness of it:
the cracked pitcher in the cracked bowl, the washstand whose lower
door would not stay open, the two yellow towels in the rack, the
bureau, the cane chairs, and the iron bed with its thin mattress
and neglected drapery.

He lowered himself into a rickety rocker and looked out through
the dirtier window at the dirty town. The only place to go was to
sleep, and he tried to make the journey. But a ferocious resentment
at the idiocy of things drove away repose.

He resolved that he had been a fool long enough. He would give up
the vain effort to conform, and would take Charity without sanction.
He was impatient to go to her then and there, but he dared not
approach her till she had rested.

He remembered a book he had picked up at one of their villages of
denial. It was one of those numberless books everybody is supposed
to have read. For that reason he had found it almost impossible to
begin. But he was desperate enough to read even a classic. He hoped
that it would be a soporific. That was his definition of a classic.

The book was the Reverend Charles Kingsley's _Hypatia._ Jim was
down on the Episcopal clergy one and all, and he read with prejudice,
skipping the preface, of course, which set forth the unusual impulse
of a churchman to help the Church of his own day by pointing out the
crimes and errors of the Church of an earlier day; a too, too rare
appeal to truth for the sake of salvation by the way of truth.

As Jim glanced angrily through the early pages, the pictures of life
in the fifth century caught and quickened his gritty eyes. He skimmed
the passages that did not hold him, but as the hours went on he grew
more unable to let go.

The sacred lunch hour passed by ignored. The rain beat down on the
roof as the words rained up from the page. The character of that
eminently wise and beautiful and good Hypatia seemed to be Charity
in ancient costume. The hostility of the grimy churchmen of that day
infuriated him. He cursed and growled as he read.

The persecution of Hypatia wrought him to such wrath that he wanted
to turn back the centuries and go to her defense. He breathed hard as
he came to the last of the book and read of the lynching of Hypatia,
the attack of the Christians upon her chariot, the dragging of her
exquisite body through the streets, and even into the church, and up
to the altar, up to the foot of "the colossal Christ watching unmoved
from off the wall, his right hand raised to give a blessing--or
a curse?"

Jim panted as Philammon did, tracing her through the streets by the
fragments of her torn robes and fighting through the mob in vain to
reach her and shield her. He became Philammon and saw not words on
a page, but a tragedy that lived again.

She shook herself free from her tormentors, and, springing back,
rose for one moment to her full height, naked, snow-white against
the dusky mass around--shame and indignation in those wide clear
eyes, but not a stain of fear. With one hand she clasped her golden
locks around her; the other long white arm was stretched upward
toward the great still Christ, appealing--and who dare say, in
vain?--from man to God.

Her lips were opened to speak; but the words that should have come
from them reached God's ear alone; for in an instant Peter struck
her down, the dark mass closed over her again ... and then wail on
wail, long, wild, ear-piercing, rang along the vaulted roofs and
thrilled like the trumpet of avenging angels through Philammon's
ears.

Crushed against a pillar, unable to move in the dense mass, he
pressed his hands over his ears. He could not shut out those
shrieks! When would they end? What in the name of the God of mercy
were they doing? Tearing her piecemeal? Yes, and worse than that.
And still the shrieks rang on, and still the great Christ looked
down on Philammon with that calm, intolerable eye, and would not
turn away. And over His head was written in the rainbow, "I am the
same, yesterday, to-day, and forever!" The same as He was in Judea
of old, Philammon? Then what are these, and in whose temple? And
he covered his face with his hands, and longed to die.

It was over. The shrieks had died away into moans; the moans to
silence. How long had he been there? An hour, or an eternity?
Thank God it was over! For her sake--but for theirs?

Startled by the vividness of the murder, Jim looked up from the
book, thinking that he had heard indeed the shrieks of Charity
in a death-agony. The walls seemed to quiver still with their
reverberation.

He put down the book in terror and saw where he was. It was like
waking from a nightmare. He was glad to find that he was not in
a temple of ancient Alexandria, but in even that dingy New Jersey
inn.

He wondered if Charity had not died. He hesitated to go to her door
and knock. She needed sleep so much that he hardly dared to risk
waking her, even to assure himself that she was alive.

He went to the window and saw two men under umbrellas talking in
the yard between the hotel wings. They would not have been laughing
as they were if they had heard shrieks.

His eye was caught by a window opposite his. There sat Charity in
a heavy bath-robe; her hair was down; she had evidently dropped
into the chair by the open window and fallen asleep.

Jim stared at her and was reminded of how he had stared at Kedzie
on his other wedding journey. Only, Kedzie had been his bride, and
Charity was not yet, and might never be. Kedzie was girlish against
an auroral sky; she was rather illumined than dressed in silk.
Charity was a heart-sick woman, driven and fagged, and swaddled now
in a heavy woolen blanket of great bunches and wrinkles. Kedzie was
new and pink and fresh as any dew-dotted morning-glory that ever
sounded its little bugle-note of fragrance. Charity was an old
sweetheart, worn, drooping, wilted as a broken rose left to parch
with thirst.

Yet it was Charity that made his heart race with love and desire
and determination. She was Hypatia to him and he vowed that the
churchmen should not deny her nor destroy her. He clenched his
fists with resolution, then went back to his book and finished
it. He loved it so well that he forgave the Church and the clergy
somewhat for the sake of this clergyman who had spoken so sturdily
for truth and beauty and mercy. He loved the book so well that he
even read the preface and learned that Hypatia really lived once
and was virtuous, though pagan, and was stripped and slain at
the Christian altar, chopped and mutilated with oyster shells in
a literal ostracism, her bones burned and her ashes flung into
the sea.

The lesson Kingsley drew from her fate was that the Church was
fatally wrong to sanction "those habits of doing evil that good
may come, of pious intrigue, and at last of open persecution,
which are certain to creep in wheresoever men attempt to set up
a merely religious empire, independent of human relationships
and civil laws." The preacher-novelist warned the Church of now
that the same old sins of then were still at work.

Jim closed the book and returned to the window to study Charity.
He vowed that he would protect her from that ostracism. His wealth
was but a broken sword, but it should save her.

He felt it childish of her to be so set upon a wedding at the hands
of one of the clergymen who stoned her, but he liked her better for
finding something childish and stubborn in her. She was so good,
so wise, so noble, so all-for-others, that she needed a bit of
obstinate foolishness to keep her from being absolute marble.

He put on his hat and his raincoat and went out into the town,
hunting a clergyman, resolved to compel him at all costs. The sudden
shower became lyrical to his mood as a railroad train clicks to the
mood of the passenger.

There was but one Episcopal church in the village and the
parsonage was a doleful little cottage against a shabby temple.
The hotelkeeper had told him how to find it, and the name of the
parson.

Jim tapped piously on the door, then knocked, then pounded. At
length a voice came to him from somewhere, calling:

"Come into the church!"

"That's what I've been trying to do for weeks," Jim growled. He
went into the church and found the parson in his shirt-sleeves. He
had been setting dishpans and wash-tubs and pails under the various
jets of water that came in through the patched roof in unwelcome
libations.

His sleeves were rolled up and he was rolling up pew cushions. He
gave Jim a wet hand and peered at him curiously. It relieved Jim
not to be recognized and regarded as a visiting demon.

The clergyman's high black waistcoat was frayed and shiny, as well
as wet, and his reverted collar had an evident edge from the way
the preacher kept moistening his finger and running it along the
rim. In spite of this worse than a hair-shirt martyrdom, the parson
seemed to be a mild and pitiful soul, and Jim felt hopeful of him
as he began:

"I must apologize, Mr. Rutledge, for intruding on you, but I--well,
I've got more money than I need and I imagine you've got less. I
want to give you a little of mine for your own use. Is there any
place you could put ten thousand dollars where it would do some
good?"

Young Mr. Rutledge felt for a moment that he was dreaming or
delirious. He made Jim repeat his speech; then he stammered:

"Oh, my dear sir! The wants of this parish! and my poor chapel! You
can see the state of the roof, and the broken windows. The people
are too poor to pay for repairs. My own pittance is far in arrears,
but I can't complain of that since so many of my dear flock are
in need. I was just about persuaded that we should have to abandon
the fight to keep the church alive. I had not counted on miracles,
but it seems that they do occur."

"Well, I'm not exactly a miracle-worker, but I've got some money
you can have if--there's a string to it, of course. But you could
use ten thousand dollars, couldn't you?"

"Indeed not," said Mr. Rutledge, feeling as Faust must have felt
when Mephisto began to promise things. A spurt of water from a new
leak brought him back from the Middle Ages and he cried: "You might
lend a hand with this tub, sir, if you will."

When the new cascade was provided for, Jim renewed his bids for
the preacher's soul:

"If you can't use ten thousand, how much could you use?"

"I don't know."

"Well, you could use a new roof at least. I'll give you a new roof,
and a real stained-glass window of Charity to replace that broken
imitation atrocity, and a new organ and hymn-books, and new pew
covers, and I'll pay your arrears of salary and guarantee your
future, and I'll give you an unlimited drawing account for your
poor, and--any other little things you may think of."

Mr. Rutledge protested:

"It's rather cruel of you, sir, to make such jokes at such a time."

"God bless you, old man! I never was so much in earnest. It's easy
for me to do those little trifles."

"Then you must be an angel straight from heaven."

"I'm an angel, they tell me, but from the opposite direction. It's
plain you don't know who I am. Sit down and I'll tell you the story
of my life."

So the little clergyman in his shirt-sleeves sat shivering with
incipient pneumonia and beatitude, and by his side in the damp pew
in the dark chapel Jim sat in his raincoat and unloaded his message.

The Reverend Mr. Rutledge had heard of Jim and of Charity, and had
regretted the assault of their moneyed determination on the bulwarks
of his faith. But somehow as he heard Jim talk he found him simple,
honest, forlorn, despised and rejected, and in desperate necessity.

He looked at his miserable church and thought of his flock. Jim's
money would put shingles on the rafters and music in the hymns and
food in the hungry. It became a largess from heaven.

He could see nothing, hear nothing, but a call to accept. He asked
for a moment to consider. He retired to pray.

His prayer was interrupted by one of his hungriest parishioners, a
Mrs. McGillicuddy, one of those poor old washerwomen whose woes pile
up till they are almost laughable to a less humorous heart than the
little preacher's. He asked her to wait and returned to his prayers.

His sheep seemed to gather about their shepherd and bleat for
pasture and shelter. They answered his prayer for him. He came
back and said:

"I will."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I do," was what Jim and Charity said a little later when Jim had
wrested Charity from her sleep by pounding at her door. He waited,
frantically, while she dressed. And he had the town's one hack at
the door below. He was afraid that the parson would change his mind
before they could get the all-important words out of him.

They rode through the rain like Heine's couple in the old stage-
coach, with Cupid, the blind passenger, between them. They ran into
the church under the last bucketfuls of shower. Jim produced the
license he had carried so long in vain. The washerwoman consented
to be one witness; the sexton-janitor made the other.

Jim had the ring ready, too. He had carried it long enough. It made
a little smoldering glimmer in the dusk church. He knelt by Charity
during the prayer, and helped her to her feet, and the little
clergyman kissed her with fearsome lips. Jim nearly kissed him
himself.

He did hug Mrs. McGillicuddy, and pressed into her hand a bill that
she thought was a dollar and blessed him for. When she got home and
found what it was she almost fainted into one of her own tubs.

Jim left a signed check for the minister, with the sumlines blank,
and begged him not to be a miser. They left with him a great doubt
as to what the Church would do to him for doing what he had done
for his chapel. But he was as near to a perfection of happiness
as he was likely ever to be.

His future woes were for him, as Charity's and Jim's were for them.
They would be sufficient to their several days; but for this black
rainy night there were no sorrows.

It was too late to get back to the city and luxury--and notoriety.
They stayed where they were and were glad enough. They expected to
fare worse on the battle-front in France where they would spend
their honeymoon.

There was some hesitation as to which of their two rooms at the
hotel was the less incommodious, but the furniture had been magically
changed. Everything was velvet and silk; what had been barrenness
was a noble simplicity; what had been dingy was glamorous.

The ghastly dinner sent up from the dining-room was a great banquet,
and the locomotive whistles and the thunderous freight-cars were
epithalamial flutes and drums.

Outside, the world was a rainy, clamorous, benighted place. And
to-morrow they must go forth into it again. But for the moment
they would snatch a little rapture, finding it the more fearfully
beautiful because it was so dearly bought and so fleeting, but
chiefly beautiful because they could share it together.

They were mated from the first, and all the people and the trials
that had kept them apart were but incidents in a struggle toward each
other. Henceforth they should win on side by side as one completed
being, doing their part in war and peace, and compelling at last from
the world, along with the blame and the indifference that every one
has always had from the world, a certain praise and gratitude which
the world gives only to those who defy it for the sake of what their
own souls tell them is good and true and honorable.

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's We Can't Have Everything, by Rupert Hughes

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WE CAN'T HAVE EVERYTHING ***

This file should be named 7cant10.txt or 7cant10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, 7cant11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 7cant10a.txt

This eBook was produced by Earle Beach, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

